Levin (1993) provides a classification of over 3000 verbs according to their participation in alternations involving NP and PP constituents.
These subcategorization patterns are then classified according to a set of 161 SCF classes.
The resulting SCF lexicon lists each verb with the scFs it takes.
The number of parameters of the model is given by k, this is the number of classes in the TCM minus one.
S is the sample size of the argument head data.
The cost of describing each argument head (n) is calculated using the log of the probability estimate for the classes on the TCM that n belongs to (ca).
To compare the preferences we compare the probability distributions across WordNet using a measure of distributional similarity.
Since the probability distributions may be at different levels of WordNet, we map the Tcms at the target slots to a common tree cut, a &amp;quot;base cut&amp;quot;.
The probability estimate for a hypernym class is obtained by combining the probability estimates for all its hyponyms on the original cut.
The UBC is at the classes B, C and D. To quantify the similarity between the probability distributions for the target slots we use the a-skew divergence (asp) proposed by Lee (1999).
We experiment with a SCF lexicon produced from 19.3 million words of parsed text from the BNC (Leech, 1992).
We used the causative and conative alternations, since these have enough candidates in our lexicon for experimentation.
From these, verbs were selected which had 75% or more agreement, i.e. three or more judges giving the same yes or no decision for the verb.
For the causative alternation we were left with 46 positives and 53 negatives.
Both groups had an average of 5 senses per verb.
A sample of 12 verbs (6 positive and 6 negative) remained after the selection process outlined above.
For this small sample we obtained a significant result (p = 0.02) with a mean accuracy of 67% and a median accuracy of 83%.
Using the Mann Whitney U test on the LO scores, we obtained a z score of 2.00.
This is significant to the 95% level, a lower level than that for the classbased experiments.
The mean produces an accuracy of 58% whilst the median produces an accuracy of 50%.
