@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Comparison of firefighters and non-firefighters and the test methods used regarding the effects of personal protective equipment on individual mobility

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We compared the mobility with PPE using pilot test methods consisting of a balance test and a physical performance test.


                        
                        
                           
                           18 participants (nine professional firefighters and nine untrained males) performed the pilot test method.


                        
                        
                           
                           Significant differences between PPEs and CON for the test results from firefighters were found.


                        
                        
                           
                           The participant group with more significance for evaluation of PPE and that was physically appropriate to this test method was firefighters.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Personal protective equipment

Test methods

Mobility

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


                  The aims of this study were 1) to evaluate the current pilot test method and ascertain reliable measurements for a standard test method of mobility with personal protective equipment (PPE), such as physical performance and balance ability tests; 2) to compare two participant groups (firefighters versus non-firefighters) and to investigate whether non-firefighters are appropriate as a standard participant group in the field of PPE or not. Totally, 18 participants (nine professional firefighters and nine untrained males) performed the current pilot test method consisting of a balance test, completed prior to and after a performance test. Significant differences were found between PPE conditions and CON (the control clothing ensemble: T-shirt, shorts, and running shoes) for the functional balance test, physical performance test, heart rate, and subjective evaluations in firefighters group. Therefore, the present pilot test method is valid as a standard test method for assessing mobility while wearing PPE. Moreover, the present result shows that firefighters are more reliable than non-firefighters in testing of PPE with current test methods.
               

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Firefighting is one of the most hazardous occupations and is associated with exceedingly high rates of injuries. Average of 38,660 American firefighter injuries occurred at the fire site (Karter, 2012). Therefore, firefighters require not only good physical capabilities but also sufficient mobility in their active work while firefighting at a high temperature and humidity with heavy personal protective equipment (PPE). PPE, which is composed of personal protective clothing (PPC) and accessories such as a self-contained breathing apparatus (SCBA), helmet, mask, gloves and boots, is necessary to protect firefighters from various occupational hazards such as fire on the high-storied and sealed buildings. In this regard, the assessment of PPE in terms of wearer mobility, as well as protective functions, is required. Although PPE aims to protect firefighters from physical and chemical harm, firefighters can become fatigued by impeded movement due to the weight and bulky nature of the multiple layers.

Therefore, studies into firefighter PPE are performed frequently. Previous studies have reported that firefighters experienced physiological strain when performing at a simulated fire site and during firefighting activities with PPE in hot and humid environments (Griefahn et al., 2003; Bakri et al., 2012). However, relatively few studies have reported on mobility with different designs and weight of PPE during firefighting activities, and Range of motion (ROM) and subjective evaluations are generally used to assess mobility in previous studies. According to previous studies, ROM of each body part was changed due to PPE designs (Coca et al., 2008, 2010; Huck, 1988, 1991), and decreased by weight of PPE and friction of wet PPE (Son et al., 2010).

There are several international standards for evaluating firefighters' PPE, but these standards are merely assigned to the heat, flame, and water resistant properties of PPE (CEN TC 162, 2002; EN 469, 2005; ISO 11613, 1999). Furthermore, few test methods for assessing mobility while wearing PPE have been established (BS 8469, 2007; CEN TC 162, 2002). Without a standard method for mobility, the comparison of several types of PPE from different research groups may lead to inaccurate interpretations. Therefore, research on a standard method for assessing the mobility of PPE is required.

From the 1970s, many studies have been performed on firefighting drills which consist of dynamic movement such as ladder drill, pulling a hose, rescue, forcible entry, and stair climbing. These are carried out as essential movements for firefighting (Gledhill and Jamnik, 1992; Smith et al., 2001; Williford et al., 1999). However, the previous research groups have merely studied the demands on firefighters using these movements. They reported the physiological responses of PPE wearers such as heart rate (HR) and metabolic demands. The mobility during firefighting drill was not evaluated in previous studies. Referring to survey of Japanese firefighters from Son et al. (2013), a large number of firefighters suffered injuries and restricted mobility due to failures in balance control (slips or falls) while wearing PPE. According to previous research, many firefighters have been injured by failing to control their balance (Karter, 2012). These reports suggest that a balance test with PPE is necessary. Therefore, for a standard method to evaluate mobility with different types of PPE, a combination of the physical performance test and functional balance test is required.

Previous studies on PPE recruited firefighters as participants (Bos et al., 2004; Coca et al., 2010; Plat et al., 2010; Smith et al., 1997; Williford et al., 1999). Also, non-firefighters were asked to perform the experiment as subjects (Huck 1988, 1991). However, the physical demands and abilities of firefighters and untrained volunteers are not same, and firefighters are more used to working with PPE than untrained subjects. Therefore, the results of previous studies could not be compared absolutely. Regarding this, we were curious as to whether untrained males, especially students are appropriate to study of standard test method for mobility with PPE. To resolve this, comparison or evaluation of participant groups is also required.

The pilot test method consisted of several measurements such as a physical performance test which was composed of a general physical fitness test and simple firefighting drills and the balance ability test, made for developing a standard test for assessing the mobility while wearing PPE in the present study. The aim of this study was to evaluate the current pilot test method and ascertain reliable measurements for developing a standard test method of mobility with PPE. The other aim was to compare two participant groups (firefighters versus non-firefighters) and to investigate whether non-firefighters are appropriate as a standard participant group in the field of PPE or not.

@&#METHODS@&#

Nine healthy Japanese professional firefighters (FFT) and nine healthy males (NFT) untrained for firefighting, performed physical performance and balance tests in this study. Participants of both groups had similar physical characteristics. For FFT, age, height, body mass, and body mass index were28.6 ± 2.4 yrs, 172.4 ± 5.9 cm, 69.4 ± 5.1 kg, and 23.4 ± 1.4 kg m−2, respectively (Mean ± SD). The age, height, body mass, and body mass index of NFT were 26.6 ± 4.3 yrs, 173.6 ± 6.1 cm, 69.2 ± 7.6 kg, and 22.9 ± 1.6 kg m−2, respectively (Mean ± SD). There were no significant differences in anthropometric data between FFT and NFT.

Participants undertook physical and balance tests using three types of PPE and a control condition (CON) wearing a T-shirt, shorts, and running shoes (total weight was 1.0 kg). According to Son et al. (2013), firefighters are working on the fire scene with the full set of PPE. Therefore, three types of full structural firefighting PPE sets, not wild land, rural or bushfire PPE sets, were used in the present study. Table 1
                         summarizes the specifications of the three types of PPE, and shows figures for PPEs. Type A comprised an aromatic polyamide upper fire coat and aromatic polyamide long pants in addition to a helmet, boots, gloves, belt, underwear, socks, and normal uniform. PPC for Type A was treated with a flame retardant. Type B comprised an aromatic polyamide upper fire coat and aromatic polyamide long pants in addition to a helmet, boots, gloves, belt, underwear, socks, and normal uniform, and PPC was also treated with flame retardant. However, the surface of type B's fire jacket was coated with a layer of aluminum. Types A and B were developed and used in Japan. Type C comprised an upper fire coat and long pants in addition to a helmet, boots, gloves, belt, underwear, socks, and normal uniform. Hainsworth TITAN and Gore-tex were used for the fire coat and pants. The fire pants of type C had suspenders, thus the wearer could control their fit. Type C was developed and is used in Europe. 11 kg of SCBA was worn for all PPE conditions.

Before the start of the test, participants were asked to perform the ‘Grip test’ and ‘Sit and reach’ test with each clothing condition for measuring grip strength and flexibility with PPE, respectively. In the grip test, the participant held the dynamometer in the hand to be tested, with the arm at right angles to and the elbow by the side of the body. When ready, the participant gripped the dynamometer with a maximum isometric effort. The ‘Sit and reach’ test involved sitting on the floor with legs stretched straight ahead. The soles of the feet were placed flat against the device (Flexometer, TK500), and then the point of the sole was set at 0 cm. The backs of the knees were stretched out and pressed flat to the floor. Participants raised their arms horizontally with palms facing downwards. The participant reached forward along the measuring bar as far as possible. At this time, position of hands should maintain same position. The distance from sole (0 cm) was recorded (range was from −30 cm to 40 cm).

The experiment protocol included two types of functional balance test, prior to and after the performance test. In the first functional balance test, performance time was measured as the time the participants took to walk along and return to the start position on a straight wooden plank (3 m × 9 cm × 5 cm). Participants started walking as quickly as possible from one end to the other. At the half-way point of the plank, participants turned and walked backward to the other end of the plank. They returned to the start point immediately in the same way. If a participant lost his balance and stepped on the ground, it was considered a performance error, and at least 1 s was added to the completion time of the participant (Punakallio et al., 2004).

The second functional balance test was the ‘Timed up and go’ test (Shumway-Cook et al., 2000). This test started with participants sitting on a stool. After the start sign, participants stood up and walked forward at as fast as possible a walking speed for 3 m, and then returned to the start point and sat on the stool again. Performance times from the start to the finish of the ‘Timed up and go’ test were measured.

An ‘Arm reach’ test was also performed (Kage et al., 2009). Participants stood and raised their right arms in a straight horizontal posture. The location of the right wrist was measured and set as the start point. Participants extended their right arm forward as far as possible. The location of the right wrist was recorded as the finish point, and we calculated the distance the right wrist moved.

For postural balance tests, two force plates (Kistler 9286BA) were used for measuring the movement of the center of pressure (COP). Two individual double stance tests were carried out, which were “eyes open” and “eyes closed”. Participants stood on the force plates in a relaxed posture, kept their hands on their pelvis, and fixed their eyes on a camera (located 2 m in front) at the level of their eye. They maintained their pose twice with eyes closed for 40 s, and then the same protocol was repeated with eyes open. We measured COP and from sway data, measured medial-lateral (ML) and anterior-posterior (AP) excursion, sway length, and the area of each test. Postural balance tests were performed two times, once prior to the physical performance test and once after.

For the physical performance test, participants carried out the following tasks inside the experiment building.
                           
                              (1)
                              Step up: for 1 min, go up and down on a 45 cm step 20 times

Side jump: for 20 s, as often as possible

Crawl: 10 m, back and forth

Object-dragging: 10 m dragging a 20 kg object back and forth

Obstacle stride: 12 m, move back and forth three times (six times crossing the 70 cm obstacle, six times passing underneath the 100 cm obstacle).

The physical performance test time did not exceed 25 min. Temperature and relative humidity were kept at 24.5 ± 0.7 °C and 62.7 ± 9.9%, respectively, during all experiments.

After the physical performance test, participants were asked to evaluate Rate of Perceived Exertion (RPE), overall subjective muscle fatigue, overall discomfort, and overall movement. Overall subjective muscle fatigue and discomfort used a 7-point scale from 0 (none) to 6 (severe muscle fatigue, extreme discomfort). Overall movement used a 7-point scale from 0 (normal) to 6 (very difficult to move during exercise). Participants were also asked to fill in subjective evaluation forms regarding wearer comfort and mobility with PPE after all tests were finished. The form contained a 7-point scale from 3 (very easy to move or comfortable) to −3 (very difficult to move or uncomfortable).

Heart rate (HR) was measured every second throughout the physical performance test using an HR monitor (RS400, Polar Electro, Finland). HR before the physical performance test was set as ‘Baseline’. HR after the physical performance was set as ‘End task’. In tasks (1), (3), (4), and (5), the performance of participants was measured by their time completion of each task, while the performance of the participants in task (2) was measured by how many steps they could do in 20 s.

Results were expressed as a mean value and standard deviation (mean ± SD). All data were statistically analyzed using the Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS 18.0). For the statistical process, a one-way ANOVA was applied to assess the effect of PPE weight and design. The t-test was used to compare the data of the two participant groups. A non-parametric test (Kruskal–Wallis test) was used to analyze subjective evaluation results. A Tukey's post hoc was used to reveal significant differences in results. Significance was set at P < 0.05.

@&#RESULTS@&#


                        Table 2
                         shows results of the grip test and ‘sit and reach’ test. Grip strength for FFT showed significantly larger values than those for NFT (P < 0.001). In FFT group, grip strength of PPE conditions were significantly lower than CON (Table 2). Type C of FFT had significantly the lowest value among all conditions (with Type A: P < 0.01; Type B: P < 0.05). In NFT groups, grip strength of PPE conditions NFT were significantly lower than those of CON, and Type C of NFT had significantly the lowest value among all conditions (P < 0.001, Table 2).

Flexibility of FFT was significant larger than those for NFT (at CON, Types A and Type B: P < 0.05; Type C: N.S). For the FFT, Types A and Type B (1.4 ± 4.9 cm and 0.8 ± 6.5 cm, respectively) were significantly lower than those of CON (10.0 ± 5.4 cm, P < 0.05). Type C for FFT was 2.7 ± 6.4 cm. However, no significant differences were found among conditions for NFT (Table 2).


                        Table 3
                         shows the results of the functional balance test, prior to and after the physical performance test. In the ‘wooden plank time’ test, Type A (before test), CON (after test) and Type B (after test) of FFT had significantly shorter performance time than NFTs'. However, there were no significant differences among conditions both before and after the task. Performance time of ‘Timed up and go’ for FFT was significantly shorter than that for NFT (P < 0.001). ‘Timed up and go’ of Type B for FFT was significantly shorter on phase after the task than that of CON (P < 0.05), whereas no significant differences among conditions for NFT both before and after task. For ‘Arm reach’ test, Type C before task (P < 0.05) and CON (P < 0.05) and Type C (P < 0.01) after task from FFT were significantly longer than NFT's. Types B and C from FFT had significantly shorter distance than CON before task (P < 0.05). However, there were no significant differences between either task phase, before or after the task for the NFT group.

Mean physical performance endurance (rest time included) for FFT was shorter than NFT (FFT and NFT were 22.7 ± 0.4 s and 24.0 ± 0.6 s, respectively, P < 0.001). However, significant differences of physical performance endurance among conditions were not found. Table 4
                         summarizes the results of the physical performance test for each group. FFT showed better performance ability in most results from all conditions for FFT and smaller standard deviations (except for CON and Type A of ‘Obstacle stride’, Fig. 1
                        ).

For step up, CON of FFT had significantly lower HR than those of Types A, B and C (P < 0.001). The NFT group had the same tendency. HR in CON for NFT was significantly lower than that among other conditions (Type A: P < 0.05; Type B: P < 0.01; Type C: P < 0.001). In the ‘Side jump’ for FFT, number of times was significantly decreased due to wearing the PPE compared with CON (P < 0.001). However, no significant differences between CON and PPE conditions were found in NFT group. The time of ‘Crawl’ for FFT in the CON condition was significantly shorter than Types A, B, and C (P < 0.01, P < 0.05, and P < 0.001, respectively), whereas no significant differences were found in NFT. In ‘Object-dragging’ for FFT, significant differences were found between CON and PPE conditions (Type A and C, both P < 0.05). There were no significant differences in ‘Object-dragging’ for NFT. For each PPE condition of ‘Obstacle striding’ of both groups, significant differences were shown between CON (P < 0.001).

In HR for ‘Baseline’ among conditions and both groups, there were no significant differences (Fig. 2
                        ). For FFT groups, HR of ‘End task’ for each PPE condition was significantly higher than CON (Type A with CON: P < 0.01; Types B and C with CON: P < 0.001). HR of ‘End task’ in NFT group was significantly lower in Types B and C than CON (P < 0.01). Table 5
                         shows the rise of HR (⊿HR) between ‘Baseline’ and ‘End task’. The rise in HR with PPE conditions was higher than CON (CON of FFT: 30 ± 16 bpm, P < 0.01; CON of NFT: 22 ± 15 bpm, with Types A and C: P < 0.05; with Type B: P < 0.01).

COP values of ‘after the task’ were higher than those of ‘before the task’, and each value of PPE conditions was higher than that of CON. However, there were no significant differences among conditions or between groups from sway excursion, lengths and area.

For subjective evaluations, PPE conditions had significantly higher RPE, muscle fatigue, discomfort, and movement values than those of CON, however there were no significant differences between groups or among PPE conditions (Fig. 3
                        ).

In wearer comfort, participants evaluated that PPE conditions were more uncomfortable than CON (P < 0.001) in both groups (Fig. 4
                        ). For the FFT group, there was a significant difference between Types A and B for the comfort item ‘Bending’ (P < 0.01). However, no significant differences among the three PPE conditions of NFT were found.

For wearer mobility, PPE conditions had lower values than CON (Fig. 5
                        ). CON was the easiest condition in which to move all body regional parts in both groups. There were also significant differences among the three PPE conditions of FFT at the elbows (between Types A and B: P < 0.05), thighs (between Types A and C: P < 0.05), knees (between Types A and B: P < 0.05; between Types A and C: P < 0.01), and ankles (between Types A and C: P < 0.01; between Types B and C: P < 0.05). However, among PPE conditions in the NFT group showed no significant differences.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The main findings of this study were that an evaluation of wearer mobility is possible using physical performance and balance ability tests. We found significant differences between PPE conditions and CON for the functional balance test, physical performance test, HR, and subjective evaluations. These differences indicate that the present measurements are useful for measuring reduced mobility due to wearing PPE.

It is generally known that the ‘Grip test’ is one of the fitness tests. It is well known that firefighting or job performance is significantly correlated with body strength. It has been reported that the ‘Grip test’ has correlations with job performance such as hose pulling, victim dragging, stair climbing and equipment hoisting (Rhea et al., 2004). The grip strength and accuracy were reduced by wearing PPE in the present study (Table 2). The PPE conditions of the present study contained bulky protective gloves consisting of thick fabric. These protective gloves increase the protection to firefighters. On the other hand, the mobility of the hand was decreased due to wearing protective gloves. Therefore, a ‘grip test’ is an appropriate measurement of mobility while wearing a full set of PPE. ‘Sit and reach’ is also well-known as a fitness tests, and a common measure of flexibility. One of findings in the present study was that wearing PPE affects the ‘Grip test’ and ‘Sit and reach’. Grip strength in the PPE conditions in the present study was significantly decreased compared to CON. This tendency was shown in both groups. Also, flexibility with PPE was reduced compared with CON. This indicated that the ‘Grip test’ and ‘Sit and reach’ are simple and reliable measurements for evaluating mobility with PPE.

For the functional balance test, we conducted three test methods; ‘Timed up and go’, ‘Arm reach’ and ‘Wooden plank time’. ‘Timed up and go’ was developed originally as a clinical measure of balance in elderly people. A long time for ‘Timed up and go’ means decreased mobility (Steffen et al., 2002). Steffen et al. (2002) clarified that ‘Timed up and go’ scores decrease due to age and that scores of males are better than females'. In the present study, we used ‘Timed up and go’ for young participants from in their twenties to thirties. The performance time of ‘Timed up and go’ increased due to the wearing of PPEs. The ‘Arm reach’ test is a popular test method for measuring balance ability is the elderly (Kage et al., 2009). According to Duncan et al. (1990), the result of an ‘Arm reach’ test is influenced by age and height. In the present study, the results of the ‘Arm reach’ test, which means the distance of arm moved was decreased by PPEs. This tendency agreed with a previous study. Coca et al. (2010) assessed job-specific tests (with the arm reach test). They found that the arm reach distance was reduced by wearing PPE. For the ‘Wooden plank time’, on the other hand, a significantly different time score was not seen wearing PPE, although previous studies evaluated differences in balance ability due to PPE and wearers' age (Punakallio, 2003; Punakallio et al., 2004). Duncan et al. (1990) showed that the functional balance test is a portable, inexpensive, reliable and reasonable method to test balance performance. In the present study, functional balance ability was decreased due to wearing PPE; especially ‘Timed up and go’ and ‘Arm reach’ had significant differences between CON and PPE conditions. Therefore, the functional balance tests, especially, ‘Timed up and go’ and ‘Arm reach’ are reliable measurements for evaluating mobility with PPE, and are recommended for the standard test method.

In the present study, the physical performance test consisted of five tasks: step up, side jump, crawl, object-dragging, and obstacle stride. Over the past several decades, similar physical performance tests were conducted in previous studies (Gledhill and Jamnik, 1992; Griefahn et al., 2003; Smith et al., 1997; Smith and Petruzzello, 1998). However, these previous studies did not evaluate results of performance tests, they conducted physical performance tests as exercise for physiological responses, although Coca et al. (2008, 2010) compared scores of the performance test to evaluate mobility and PPEs. Coca et al. (2008) found an increase in the performance time for ‘mannequin drag’ with PPE. In the present study, wearing three kinds of PPE affected not only physical performance but also times. The British Standard for Ergonomics (BS 8469, 2007) established a rating of mobility restriction (from 1: maximal restrictive mobility to 4: minimal restrictive mobility). According to BS 8469 (2007), performance times of >200%, >150%, >110% and <110% of baseline (CON) are levels 4, 3, 2, and 1, respectively. In this study, the each performance times of FFT for PPEs were between 110% and 150% of CON, and, as such, would have a BS 8469 rating of 3. For NFT, ‘object-dragging’ would have a BS 8469 rating of 4 (<110%), and the others would have rating of 3 (110% < 150%).

HR is one danger indication for intense physical activity. The present results for HR showed no significant differences before the physical performance test among conditions. However, after about 20 min of the physical performance test, HR in each PPE condition was significantly higher than those of CON in both groups. Rising HR due to exercise with PPE has been frequently shown in previous studies. Barr et al. (2010) reviewed that HR from previous studies was recorded at over 160 bpm after firefighting drills. However, in the present study, HR of FFT and NFT were measured at around 120 and 115 bpm in the physical performance test with PPE, respectively. Although HR rose slightly due to the present physical performance test, HR after the test showed significant differences between CON and PPE conditions. Therefore, for the standard test method, HR should become one measurement in order to evaluate PPE and check the condition of participants.

In previous studies, where wearing PPE influenced COP parameters, Sobeih et al. (2006) showed that postural stability decreased as firefighters spent more time on duty with PPE. Kincl et al. (2002) investigated postural stability while wearing different levels of PPE, and clarified that sway length was a sensitive parameter for postural balance. Punakallio (2003) showed that postural balance ability was related to the age of the firefighter. However, in this study, we could not find significant differences in the postural balance test among all conditions. Furthermore, to measure postural sway requires particular devices and an analysis system. We used force plates to measure COP and previous studies used a balance measurement device. Therefore, a postural balance test is not a necessary measurement for a standard test method due to its low effectiveness for evaluation and convenience.

For subjective evaluation, all participants of this study responded that PPE conditions had lower values than CON in RPE, muscle fatigue, discomfort, and movement (Fig. 3). A similar tendency was shown for wearer comfort (Fig. 4). However, participants could not evaluate most items of wearer comfort among PPE conditions, although it was possible to subjectively and significantly evaluate wearer mobility among PPE conditions (Fig. 5). Therefore, evaluation of wearer mobility is considered to be an essential and effective measurement for evaluation of mobility with different PPE.

PPEs used for this study were designed by different companies or in different countries and have different designs. In previous studies, Coca et al. (2008) found a significant decrease in ROM and task performance ability due to different PPE designs, and Huck (1988) evaluated and compared the ROM of eight motions while wearing three different firefighter coats designed with different lengths. Moreover, Griefahn et al. (2003) evaluated the effect of SCBA with PPE. They found that different SCBA shapes and weights had a physiological effect on the body. Bakri et al. (2012) investigated the effect of different PPE weight and harness systems on subjective evaluation. The weight of the SCBA can affect wearers physiologically and physically. However, in the present study, we focused on the effect due to the combination of individual item of PPE such as SCBA and PPC. SCBA weights measured in the present study were the same in each condition (11 kg), and three types of PPC comprised of different materials and design, but had similar weights (8.2 kg–9.8 kg, Table 1) were used. In the present study, the mobility significantly declined due to the weight of the full set of PPEs around 20 kg, and it was identified by the present pilot test method. We could not found any significant differences in each measurement among different types of PPE. However, significant decline of mobility was found in the subjective evaluation. Therefore, the present test method may have shown significant differences in the case of evaluation for many types of full PPE sets with great differences in design and weight.

The secondary aim of this study was to compare two participant groups (firefighters versus non-firefighters) and to investigate whether non-firefighters are appropriate in a standard participant group in the field of PPE or not. We investigated functional balance ability and a physical performance test using two participant groups, firefighters and non-firefighters. Participants in FFT were trained for firefighting and PPE. FFT had good scores for functional balance tests and performance tests. We also frequently found significant differences between CON and PPE conditions in each measurement of FFT, though standard deviations of FFT were smaller than those for NFT (Table 4 and Fig. 1). Furthermore, all results from CON for FFT showed significantly better scores than NFT. From these results, we presumed the NFT group lacked physical ability for conducting the present test method. According to the review of Barr et al. (2010), firefighting such as climbing ladder and stairs, rescuing and filling a hose require high levels of aerobic fitness. It is generally also well-known that firefighters have more efficient physical ability. The previous researchers compared oxygen consumption and thermoregulatory burden of the firefighters and ordinary students. 
                           
                              
                                 
                                    VO
                                 
                                 
                                    2
                                    max
                                 
                              
                           
                         of firefighters were higher than students, and oxygen consumption and thermoregulatory burden of the firefighters were lower than the students. Subjective evaluation of the present study is also a sensitive method for measuring wearer mobility provided results are considered on an individual basis; however, significant differences among PPEs were limited to FFT. In addition, NFT had lower significance levels for the results of physical performance test than those for FFT (Table 4). Based on these results, it appears that firefighters are more suitable as standard participants than non-firefighters such as students. Besides, the test method of this study seems overly intense exercise for non-firefighters. Therefore, to recruit non-firefighters as participant group for the present test method is not advisable.

This test method has several kinds of supplement points. Slight differences among clothing design, materials and harness system are not evaluated with this method. Moreover, extremely high humidity and temperature are not encouraged for this method. This test method is designed for mobility restricted by clothing and equipments' load, not by thermal strain. Moreover, the decline of mobility due to each individual item of firefighters' PPE was not evaluated in this study.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

The present study aimed to ascertain whether mobility test methods for PPE such as physical capability and balance ability tests are suitable for investigating the effects of PPE's weight and design on mobility. We found significant differences due to weight of PPE for the present test method conducted to functional balance test (especially, ‘Timed up and go’ and ‘Arm reach’), physical performance test, HR, and subjective evaluations. Thus, the measurements for evaluation of mobility due to wearing PPE in this study are regarded as valid. Therefore, this test method is distinguishable from test methods for mobility that considered balance and physical performance. However, the postural balance test seems unsuitable for evaluating mobility due to its low effectiveness and convenience. Furthermore, the other aim of the present study was to compare two participant groups (firefighters versus non-firefighters) to establish which is more appropriate as a standard participant group. For the present results, the firefighter group is more used to working with PPE and had more significant differences for each test on most measurements. Therefore, more significant results should be obtained by studying firefighters as a standard participant group. This study provides validate and useful data for evaluating wearers' mobility with PPEs, and the present test method is needed to compare PPEs.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

We would like to express our thanks to Mr. Mutsuhiro Fujiwara and Ms. Shizuka Umezaki for their technical support and administrative advice. We would like to convey special thanks to Dr. Titis Wijayanto and Ms. Colleen Mathieu for their advice and cordial assistance, also. This study was supported by the Promotion Program for Fire and Disaster Prevention Technologies, Japan.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

