@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Objective classification of performance in the use of a piercing saw in jewellery making

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Objective measures of tool use defined.


                        
                        
                           
                           Data collected from sensors fitted to tool used in situ.
                           


                        
                        
                           
                           Performance classified in terms of control, regulatory and functional parameters.


                        
                        
                           
                           Methods and analysis for the study of skilled tool use developed and illustrated.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Tool use

Jewellery making

Functional dynamics

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


                  Data from 15 jewellery students, in their 1st and 3rd years of training, were analysed to show how data collected from work settings can be used to objectively evaluate performance in the use of tools. Participants were asked to use a piercing saw to cut 5 lines in a piece of metal. Performance was categorised in terms of functional dynamics. Data from strain gauges and a tri-axial accelerometer (built into the handle of the saw) were recorded and thirteen metrics derived from these data. The key question for this paper is which metrics could be used to distinguish levels of ability. Principal Components Analysis identified five components: sawing action; grasp of handle; task completion time; lateral deviation of strokes; and quality of lines cut. Using representative metrics for these components, participants could be ranked in terms of performance (low, medium, high) and statistical analysis showed significant differences between participants on key metrics.
               

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

This paper focuses on the question of how one distinguishes between different levels of performance in the use of tools in the workplace (rather than in laboratory settings). Ergonomics has a long history of researching hand tools (Dudley, 1968; Freivalds, 1987; Greenberg and Chaffin, 1977; Kuijt-Evers et al., 2004; Lewis and Narayan, 1993; Mital, 1991; Rubin et al., 1952; Salvendy and Seymour, 1973; Seymour, 1953, 1972). While the study of performance and expertise in tool use played a major role in ergonomics research in the 1960s and 1970s, it has received less attention in recent years (Baber, 2003, 2006). At an applied level, understanding what constitutes variability in tool use could inform the design of tools or the training of tool users, and at a theoretical level, such understanding can help in explaining how skill is acquired and why it varies across individuals. In order to define levels of performance in tool use, the paper follows the functional dynamics approach that has been developed by Bril and her colleagues (Biryukova and Bril, 2008; Bril et al., 2010; Parry et al., 2014).

Much of the work into functional dynamics of tool use has focussed on flint-knapping. In this activity, a core of flint is worked using a hammer stone. When performing flint-knapping, experts (in comparison to novices) show a greater range of joint angle excursions in their movements (Biryukova and Bril, 2008), have significantly lower variability in kinetic energy (Bril et al., 2010) and are able to modify several parameters at the same time whereas novices tend focus on one parameter at a time (Vernooij et al., 2012). Thus, an activity which might appear quite mundane exhibits variability in terms of performance, such that it can take time and practice to become proficient. Roux et al. (1995) showed that expert craftsmen (using hammers to make beads from glass or stone) exhibit significantly less variation in performance than less experienced workers, suggesting that not only is there greater accuracy but also greater precision, or consistency, across the skilled tool users.

The work of Bril and her colleagues suggests that it is important to consider the type of action that is required to achieve a goal, and then determine the parameters which contribute to this action. Rather than seeing the goal in terms of the outcome of tool use, it makes more sense to regard the goal as one of several parameters which need to be managed. In this way, performance involves the definition of a dependent variable through the management of a set of independent variables. In studies of flint-knapping, the chosen dependent variable was the kinetic energy of the hammer as it strikes the stone (Fkin = ½mass × velocity).
                           1
                        
                        
                           1
                           For example, out of the 15 participants, participant P01 is ranked 3rd for Resultant Velocity, 8th for Peak Grip Force, 5th for Time per Line, 15th for Line Quality and 3rd for SD x; arranging these ranks in gives 3 3 5 8 15; thus, the median value is 5. This estimation of median was repeated for all participants.
                         This dependent variable, the functional parameter, defines the problem that the tool user is seeking to solve within the constraints imposed by the task. For flint-knapping, the problem is to remove pieces of flint from the core stone using an appropriate level of force (too much force could damage the core, too little could be ineffective). In order to manage this functional parameter, the tool user will modify velocity with which the hammer stone is moved. This represents the regulatory parameters (which the person can adjust) that result in the desired functional parameter. In the work of Bril and colleagues, regulatory parameters involve variation in potential energy, trajectory and distance travelled by the hammer as well as muscular effort. However, this set of regulatory parameters can lead to infinite ways in which actions can be performed, i.e., the well-known degrees of freedom problem in movement science (see below). Hence, the user will set limits on the selection of actions through the use of regulatory parameters, which can be further constrained by the control parameters, such as mass of the hammer stone used or other task demands.

In the field of biomechanics it is well known that muscle use and limb-segment movement shows inter- and intra-individual variation for the same movement execution (Scholz and Schöner, 1999; Riley and Turvey, 2002; Bergin et al., 2014). Examples are muscle activation patterns during human walking and running (e.g. Arsenault et al., 1986; Guidetti et al., 1996; Winter and Yack, 1987) or muscle recruitment in response to pain, such as lower back pain (Hides et al., 1996; Tucker et al., 2012; D'hooge et al., 2013). Similarly, EMG activity varies both with respect to muscle recruitment and activation intensity across participants when performing carpentry activities (Hammarskjöld et al., 1990). While the generation of a movement may vary within a bounded parameter space, visual inspection of the movements may lead one to conclude that they are identical. Quantification of this variability in movement may allow comparison of task performance across different people without the degree of freedom problem becoming a confounding factor. In the present study, we seek to quantify such parameters to investigate whether they indeed correlate with level of performance.

For this paper, we seek to define functional, control, and regulatory parameters for the use of a piercing saw. We can relate these parameters to Ergonomics notions of tool use through a quotation from Seymour (1972): “First, the experienced worker usually employs ‘smoother’ and more consistent movements [… ]. Secondly, the experienced worker operates more rhythmically, indicating that a higher degree of temporal organization has been achieved. Thirdly, the experienced worker makes better use of the sensory data [… ]. Fourthly, the experienced worker reacts in an integrated way to groups of sensory signals, and makes organized, grouped responses to them”. The summary of relevant parameters from past work is as follows:
                           
                              i.
                              Control Parameters include the mass of the hammer stone and the velocity with which the hammer stone hits the core. Experts showed greater consistency in their behaviour when control parameters changed. The suggestion that there are differences in expert and novice hammering accords with the observation of Salazar and Knapp (1996) that using a hammer in the non-preferred (and, by implication, less skilled) hand is significantly inferior to use in the preferred hand;

Regulatory parameters include the trajectory followed by the hammer stone and the potential energy applied. Regulatory parameters, to some extent, are under the control of the participant, but can lead to constraints on other aspects of task performance. Improved performance arises when the action become smoother and less variable because of the integration of actions into a seamless sequence. In Seymour's (1972) terms, this shows how experts are able to use a ‘higher degree of temporal organization’, i.e., demonstrating less variability in the timing of actions, and also to make ‘better use of the sensory data’, i.e., indicating a capability to pay attention to visual, tactile, auditory cues, in managing their actions (see also Dudley, 1968; Salvendy and Seymour, 1973; Seymour, 1953; Rubin et al., 1952);

Movement Parameters – the kinematics of the task performance. As Seymour (1972) put it, the expert actions are performed in a ‘smoother’, ‘more consistent’, ‘more rhythmical’ manner;

The Functional parameter, in the case of flint-knapping, is kinetic energy, which is not directly under the control of the participant but represents the dependent variable which defines performance. In the studies discussed above, Bril and colleagues show that expert activity when performing flint-knapping tasks results in constant kinetic energy, which is kept as low as possible without compromising performance between movement cycles. Presumably, kinetic energy relates to the manner in which a blow is made on the core stone. Using other tools for other purposes are likely to involve the definition of other Functional parameters, and it is a question for this paper as to what the Functional parameter might for people using piercing saws.

In previous research, strain gauges have been fitted to tool handles in order to measure grip force (Fellows and Freivalds, 1991; Kilbom et al., 1993; McGorry et al., 2003; Murphy et al., 2000; Stoy and Aspen, 1999). In this paper, we follow the lead of McGorry (2001) who mounted strain gauges in a bespoke tool handle in order to measure grip force. The handle was made from a hexagonal bar, milled to produce three beams around a hollow centre, with the strain gauges mounted on top and underneath each beam. Our design (Fig. 1
                        ) is much the same (except we mount the strain gauges on to strips which are then screwed to hexagonal bolts at each end). The handles can then be fitted with different tool heads; in this paper, we attached a jeweller's piercing saw to the handle. In addition to measuring grip force, we were interested in the kinetics of tool use. This has received less attention in the recent ergonomics literature, although the previous section considered some of the research in the motor skills domain which looks at the relationship between tool-use and movement. In this study, we have fitted a tri-axial accelerometer in the tool's handle to derive kinematic parameters.

The handle consists of three strips of stainless steel (140 mm × 14 mm × 2 mm) attached to two hexagonal bolts (25 mm diameter); attachment is to alternate edges on the bolt. Each strip has a 120Ω strain gauge mounted on it, which is used to detect the bending force exerted on the bar. A tri-axial accelerometer (ADXL335), strain gauge amplification circuit, microcontroller, and battery are all contained within the space between the strips, while a Bluetooth wireless module is mounted on the end of the handle. The analogue signals from the strain gauge circuit and the accelerometer are digitised by the microcontroller and then transmitted to a host computer via the Bluetooth module. A more detailed description of the design and construction can be found in Parekh and Baber (2010).

A piercing saw (see Fig. 2
                        ) is similar to a fretsaw, with a very fine blade. The fineness of the blade dictates one of the main constraints on using this type of saw; too much force the blade will snap. The fine teeth permit delicate manipulation of the saw to allow detailed shapes to be cut from metal. The saw is (typically) held vertically, with sawing motion in vertical direction. The orientation of the teeth in the saw blade means that cutting is performed on the down strokes. Ideally, there should be as little pressure as possible applied when cutting and the full length of the blade should be used in the cut.
                           2
                        
                        
                           2
                           These instructions were provided by the tutors we spoke with, but see also, for example, http://www.dave-cushman.net/bee/piercingsaw.html.
                        
                     

Often jewellers speak of allowing the saw to do the work. For us, this raises the notion of affordance (Gibson, 1979). Rather than viewing an affordance as the property of an object, we prefer to regard it (in similar terms of Chemero, 2009) as arising from the behaviour of the system in which it occurs. To say simply that the ‘saw affords cutting metal’ overlooks the interplay of factors in an environment-user-tool-object ‘system’ (Baber et al., 2014) and it is in this interplay that one can differentiate skill. In other words, one would expect skilled performers to be better able to perform the line-cutting task because they allow the saw to do the work rather than attempt to impose undue force during cutting. In order to do this, skilled tool users would adopt a loose grip of the saw's handle which, as a consequence, relaxes their wrist and allows a more flexible movement of the forearm-wrist-hand to produce longer, more consistent vertical strokes during sawing. These long, smooth, consistent strokes continue to cut the metal as long as the blade does not stick or break (and both of these failures can be catered for, either by rubbing the saw with wax to lubricate it and reduce the possibility of sticking or by ensuring that minimal lateral force is applied to the blade during cutting). From this perspective, the ‘affordance’ of the saw is less to do with its physical properties and more to do with the manner in which the environment-user-tool-object system is adapted to contextual demands. From this, the concept of an affordance is not dissimilar to that of an ‘attractor’ in dynamical systems, i.e., a state in which the system will most likely be in equilibrium. For the study of tool-use, this offers us two useful insights. The first is that variation in the environment-user-tool-object system (e.g., arising from changes to any of the components) can lead to different affordances. Thus, the less experienced user might be unable to appreciate or even recognise the affordances of particular states in the interaction. The second is that the changing states in this system create changing affordances. The more experienced user of the tool will be able to not only recognise and appreciate the changing states but also anticipate these changes. This could potentially mean that the expert is continually shifting the ‘system’ to new affordances (even if this might result in inelegant or uncomfortable movements during the transitions). While the focus of this paper is not explicitly on the recognition, appreciation or anticipation of state in a dynamic interaction, this brief discussion of affordance can be related to Bril's concept of functional dynamics. The argument is that it is not sufficient to only consider joint motion or muscle activation when using a tool but also to consider the dynamics of the interplay between the different components of the environment-user-tool-object system. While we do not consider the role of the environment in this paper, the interplay of the other system components (saw, material, user) are central to the analysis and discussion.

In terms of functional dynamics for piercing saw use, we describe the task studied in this paper as follows. The goal is to saw a 1 cm line into a strip of copper. The task constraints relate to the manner in which the copper is held on the bench peg (as well as the properties of the copper, e.g., thickness etc.) and the requirement to move the saw vertically. From the description of using a piercing saw, we suggest that the functional parameter can be defined as the percentage of blade used. Good practice is to use as much of the blade as possible on each stroke. This is not to deny that the task could be performed using short, rapid strokes, but this is not the recommended way to use such a saw. The control properties relate to the nature of the saw blade (we used a 6/0 blade which is 14 cm long, 0.18 mm thick, 0.32 mm wide, with 32 teeth per cm) and the metal being sawn (we used strips of copper, 1 mm thick, 3 cm long and 2 cm wide). Regulatory parameters relate to the grip force on the handle. Movement parameters relate to velocity of saw motion.

In this paper, we explore whether an understanding of functional dynamics allows us to distinguish between performance levels in a jewellery-making task. It is proposed that the research reported here makes three contributions to the literature. First, extending the concept of functional dynamics from flint-knapping (which involves discrete and repetitive hammering actions) to sawing (which involves continuous and repetitive movement) provides an opportunity to explore the ways in which different tasks might be controlled. Second, the emphasis on dynamic interaction between user and tool creates a very different approach to the study of skilled tool use when compared with approaches which rely on assumptions about motor programmes or motor schema. Rather than assuming that the tool user learns and encodes a particular set of actions (as implied by motor programme/schema approaches), the tool user might only need the ability to recognise the variation in parameters as an activity unfolds (Latash, 2010). Through experience, these parameters are tuned by what Bernstein (1967) terms a coordinative structure: neuromuscular activation which corresponds to particular desired states, using variation in specific parameters to indicate the boundaries of activity. This highlights a third contribution in that it provides alignment with the notion that tool use can be considered in terms of an environment-user-tool-object system (Baber, 2006; Kadefors et al., 1993; Kuijt-Evers et al., 2004). The main objective for this study was to identify key measures of performance (derived from the data produced by strain gauges and accelerometers mounted in a tool's handle) that could differentiate levels of performance, or skill.

In order to pursue the study's main objective, we approached the School of Jewellery in Birmingham and discussed ways in which we could recruit a group of novice users of tools and a contrasting group of more experienced users.

A group of novice (i.e., first year) and a contrasting group of more experienced (i.e., third year) tool users were recruited from the School of Jewellery at Birmingham City University. The School of Jewellery runs a two-year programme on Jewellery Making (HND Jewellery and Silversmithing) and a one year extension to convert this to a BA Jewellery and Silversmithing. During the initial weeks of the HND course, students are introduced to the tools and techniques that they will use in their studies. As the course involves the production of sample pieces, their initial project requires them to use piercing saws and jeweller's files. It was agreed that tasks involving these tools would be appropriate for this study: the tasks were fairly easy to master, students use the tools regularly throughout their practice, and the simple, repetitive nature of the tasks lends itself to system dynamics descriptions. Comparison between 1st year students (in their first weeks of study) and 3rd year students was felt to provide a reasonable contrast in levels of ability.

All participation in this study was voluntary. An initial presentation was given by the lead and second authors of this paper, in which the aims of the study were explained and the instrumented tools demonstrated. Students were invited to participate in a study session. The study design had undergone University of Birmingham ethical review prior to recruitment.

In total 18 students volunteered to participate in this study. Twelve students were in the 1st year of the HND Jewellery and Silversmithing programme (2 male and 10 female; mean ± SD age 20.3 (±3.5) years; 2 left-handed and 10 right-handed). This represented some 90% of the cohort of students on that programme. Six students were in the 3rd year of a BA Jewellery and Silversmithing degree (5 male and 1 female; mean age 28.8 (±11.9) years; all 6 were right-handed). This represented 50% of the cohort of students on that programme. While the 1st year students were being given instruction on the use of piercing saws, some students (4 out of 12) had used these previously and the lecturers noted that these were already quite adept in the use of the tools. Thus, simply categorising level of ability in terms of year of study would not necessarily give a fair reflection of performance. This was one of the primary reasons why a more objective approach to categorising performance was felt to be appropriate.

@&#PROCEDURE@&#

On arrival, participants were given a sheet outlining the project aims and a brief explanation of the project. They were asked to sign a consent form, which indicated that any data collected would be anonymous and would not be used to identify them. They were told that any data collected could be submitted for publication, and that they were free to withdraw from the experiment at any time. On signing the consent form, the equipment was demonstrated to them and the task explained. Participants were told that the experiment would take approximately 15 min and involve two parts: sawing five lines, 1 cm each in length, in a piece of copper (which is the focus of this paper), and sawing and filing a 1 cm disc from copper (which will be the subject of a subsequent paper). When they were satisfied that they had understood the task requirements, participants picked up the saw and worked at their own pace to complete the tasks.

All data collection was performed at bench in a workshop on the top floor of the School of Jewellery. This workshop contained sets of six benches arranged, in a hexagon, around a central column (containing a power supply). There were three such arrangements in the workshop, together with four rows of back-to-back benches. Each workbench has a semi-circular space in its front, in which the person sits, and a ‘bench peg’ (a triangular abutment) against which the piece being worked is held (see Fig. 2). Data were collected using an instrumented handle that we had designed and built (see section 1.2). Data were sampled at a rate of 120 Hz which, from pilot studies, was shown to be sufficient to capture the actions being studied without overloading the Bluetooth communication channel.

The task was to cut 5 lines into a piece of copper. The lines were to be 1 cm in length and spaced as the participant felt appropriate. The copper was not scribed (marked) to indicate either length of line or position. We felt that asking participants to judge the length of the line would be an additional challenge for the task, which could be indicative of experience. Each line took approximately 1 min to complete, although participants worked at their own pace. If the saw blade broke (which it did on two occasions), the recording was stopped and the blade replaced. The participant then picked up where he/she had left off and the recording resumed. We had intended, on these occasions, to merge the two recordings (before and after the blade snapped) after the experiment, but this proved difficult and one participant was excluded from the analysis.

It is worth noting that, during the manual segmentation of the data (see section 2.3.3), for two participants, the demarcation between sawing and other action was not clear. This was either because there was little or no time between finishing one cut and starting the next (which was apparent from one of the videos) or because the motion of the saw between cutting lines was highly variable (one participant was ‘waving’ the saw around as he spoke to us between cutting each line). While we could have used the video recordings to estimate where lines stopped and started, we preferred to use only the data that had been recorded from the sensors and, thus, excluded these 2 sets of data from further analysis. As all 3 excluded sets (1 with the broken blade and 2 with demarcation problems) were from the 1st year students, we felt that this was acceptable because it still meant that we had a sample size which was comparable with the 3rd year students (i.e., 1st year N = 9 and 3rd year N = 6).

In total, the data collection produced a set of thirteen measures of performance for each of the lines cut {resultant velocity, mean y velocity, SD y velocity, SD of SD y velocity, mean x velocity, SD x velocity, SD of SD x velocity, Fundamental frequency (F0) y velocity, maximum strain gauge output, average strain gauge output, total grip force, kinetic energy}. A definition of these parameters in provided in Appendix 1. The analyses of data in this section relate to 15 participants cutting 5 lines each. All statistical analysis reported in this paper was performed using IBM SPSS v14.

Subjective rating was performed by tutors at the School of Jewellery, who were asked simply to order the sets on lines on reflecting their interpretation of the lines' quality. Broadly, the ranking followed a set of criteria in which length of line (longer is better; none of the lines exceeded 1 cm in length, but many were between 0.5 cm and 1 cm) was followed by straightness of line followed by width of cut (wider lines were less good because they resulted from greater horizontal movement of the saw). From visual inspection of the images in Fig. 3
                            one can see that these criteria were applied with reasonable consistency. The lowest rank is defined as the ‘best’ quality (i.e., a rank of 1 is the ‘best’).

In terms of defining the length of blade used in each cut, accelerometer data were double-integrated to give an approximation of distance. For this purpose, accelerometer data were integrated once to get velocity (in metres per second) and velocity was then integrated again to get distance in metres. This analysis gives an output of between 8 cm and 12 cm. As the saw blade was 14 cm in length, this suggests that there is a reasonable fit between the length of the saw and these derived measures.

Prior to analysis, manual segmentation of the data was performed. This was done because the data collection ran continuously for the duration of the task and it was decided to exclude periods when the participant was not sawing from the analysis. Thus, the data file was first split into five segments; one for completion of each line. This segmentation involved visual inspection of the entire data trace from the accelerometers and marking periods in which there was minimal activity. As each participant was asked to cut five lines, this meant that we expected to extract five segments for each participant (one for each cut line) from the continuous recording and that these segments would only include recordings when action was being performed. Fig. 4
                            shows that the demarcation of action and inaction was fairly clear. Given the sampling rate, any error in identifying the start or stop of the segment was felt to be negligible.

For the purposes of this paper, we took the resultant of the three strain gauges to give an approximation of force applied. This measure shows change in force over time. Calibration of the strain gauges is described in Appendix 2.

All velocity-based measures were derived from the output of the tri-axial accelerometer. The output of accelerometers is affected by gravity and takes the form of raw output of the Analogue to Digital (ADC) converter in the microcontroller. Thus, these data needed to be converted into a usable measure of velocity. The accelerometer data were corrected for drift and then integrated to quantify velocity in m/s (see Appendix 3). The velocity data were initially analysed in terms of their mean and standard deviation (for each axis) and the resultant velocity, Vres, defined as:
                              
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          V
                                          
                                             r
                                             e
                                             s
                                          
                                       
                                       =
                                       
                                          
                                             
                                                (
                                                
                                                   
                                                      x
                                                      2
                                                   
                                                   +
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      y
                                                      2
                                                   
                                                   +
                                                   
                                                      z
                                                      2
                                                   
                                                
                                                )
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           where x, y, z are the velocity data from each axis with a moving window of 100 samples; see appendix for details.

In addition to standard deviation on each axis, we calculated the standard deviation of the standard deviation which was used to define the level of control of the motion. The velocity data for the primary direction of motion (i.e., y-axis) were also used to calculate the dominant, or fundamental (F0) frequency of this activity, using a Discrete Fourier Transform. Finally, the resultant velocity data were used to calculate kinetic energy in the sawing action as follows:
                              
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          E
                                          
                                             k
                                             i
                                             n
                                          
                                       
                                       =
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             1
                                             
                                          
                                          2
                                       
                                       
                                          (
                                          
                                             m
                                             
                                                v
                                                2
                                             
                                          
                                          )
                                       
                                       ,
                                    
                                 
                              
                           where m = mass of the saw (0.306 kg) and v = the resultant velocity.

Given the number of measures of performance that were collected, an initial exploration of these data was conducted using Principal Components Analysis (PCA), in order to explore relationships within the data set, and to provide an initial categorisation of performance. The Kaiser–Meyer–Olkin measure of sampling adequacy (0.505) and Bartlett's test of sphericity (x
                           
                              2
                           (78) = 1305,121, p < 0.001) indicated that the sample size was acceptable for PCA.

From the PCA, we grouped participants according to their performance on the basis of the identified key metrics, i.e., the metrics which contributed most highly to a component. On the basis of the median rank across these key metrics, participants were assigned to one of three groups. This allowed us to partition the data into three sets of performance: ‘high’, ‘medium’ and ‘low’, with equal numbers in each group, i.e., 5 per group from the 15 participants whose data were analysed (see above for explanation of missing data).

@&#RESULTS@&#


                        Fig. 3 shows the ranking of lines cut in terms of quality, where the lowest rank is defined as the ‘best’ quality (i.e., a rank of 1 is the ‘best’). The median ranking for the 1st year students was 12 (IQR 6–15.5) out of 15 and for the 3rd year students it was 6 (IQR 2.5–9) out of 15. Thus, despite some variation in the ranking, it would appear that the 3rd year students produced lines which were rated as being of higher quality (on average) than the 1st year students. One explanation of this could be that judging the length of a line by eye was an additional skill that the 3rd year students had developed. However, in the first 5 ranks there were three 1st year students and two 3rd year students (and in the top 10 ranks there were equal numbers of 1st and 3rd year students). This means that simply defining skill level based on the year of study could be misleading.

In section 1.3, a definition of ‘good practice’ in the use of a piercing saw was offered in terms of minimal grip force applied to the handle (in order to keep the wrist supple enough to make minor corrective adjustments during sawing) while using as much of the saw blade as possible (making the saw do the work). In section 2.3.4 we explained how we derived measures of force applied to the handle, and in section 2.3.2 how we derived measures of the length of blade used to estimate the percentage of a 14 cm blade used in cutting a line. Table 1
                        
                         shows these values for the 3rd year and 1st year students.

As one might expect, the 1st year students, on average, use less of the blade in their strokes and apply more force to the handle in comparison with the 3rd year students. However, as Table 3
                         shows, some of the results do not fit a simple correlation between performance and year of study.

Principal Component Analysis with Varimax rotation produced a thirteen-component solution. In order to determine which items could be included in a given component, a threshold of 1 was set for initial eigenvalues. The initial solution had SD of SD x loading on four of the components. This was removed from the set and analysis rerun. This produced a five-component solution, which accounted for 87.2% of the total variance. Further inspection of the component matrix was conducted in order to check for cross loadings on the items (i.e., items which either scored highly on more than one component or which exceeded a loading threshold of ±0.3). Table 2 shows that three items have component loadings which are greater than or equal to 0.3 (‘mean y velocity’, ‘F0’ and ‘resultant grip force’). This suggests that while these items load most strongly on one item, their contribution to other components cannot be ignored. All other components show no cross loading.

From the PCA, we grouped participants according to their performance on the basis of key metrics, i.e., the metrics which contributed most highly to a component and which did not exhibit cross loading. This is shown in Table 3. On the basis of the median
                           2
                         rank across these key metrics, participants were assigned to one of three groups. This allowed us to partition the data into three sets of performance: ‘high’, ‘medium’ and ‘low’, with equal numbers in each group, i.e., 5 per group from the 15 participants whose data were analysed. The choice of three groups was motivated partly by the desire to have equal numbers in each group and partly by the median ranking of performance on key metrics which showed boundaries between ranks 1–5, 6–10 and 11–15. Table 3 shows how, in a similar manner to Table 1, there is not a strong mapping between year of study of categorization of ‘high’ (although, the 3/5 students are in the ‘high’ category are 3rd year, and 4/5 in the ‘low’ category and 4/5 in the ‘medium’ category are 1st year).

While the quantity and type of data was sufficient to perform PCA, we felt that, given the group size (N = 5) when we divided participants into low, medium and high performance, non-parametric tests ought to be conducted to compare the three groups. Thus, Kruskal–Wallis tests were applied to determine if there were differences between the three groups across all of the metrics. The results of these tests are shown in Table 4
                           .

Performance between the groups differed on the following measures: resultant velocity; mean y, SD y and SD of SD y; peak and resultant grip force; time to cut each line; F0; subjective rating of lines. We have already considered (in section 3.1) how ‘subjective rating of line’ could differentiate performance, so will not consider this further in this section. Rather than consider all of these measures, selection of metrics was based on the item's contribution to each component in Table 2. The metrics ‘kinetic energy’ and ‘resultant velocity’ had the highest weighting for component 1 ‘sawing action’. As ‘kinetic energy’ is (in this instance) a function of velocity, we have used ‘resultant velocity’ and take this to indicate a movement parameter. Table 4 shows that there is a significant difference between groups in terms of resultant velocity (p < 0.0001). The metric ‘time for line’ has the highest weighting for component 3 ‘task completion’ and we take this to indicate a control parameter. Table 4 shows a significant difference form this metric (p < 0.001). Peak Grip force is the key metric in component 2 ‘grasp of handle’, shows significant difference between groups in Table 4 (p < 0.05) and is used to indicate a regulatory parameter. Component 5 ‘lateral deviation of stroke’ has SD of x as the key metric, but Table 4 shows that this did not produce any significant difference between groups. As noted previously, we defined the Functional parameter for this task as percentage blade used (see Table 1). We did not include this measure in the PCA because it was not a direct measurement but was, rather, derived from sensor data (as explained in 2.3.2). However, Table 4 indicates that this, of itself, would not be sufficient to distinguish levels of performance.

Given the significant difference between groups, in terms of the time to cut a line, Fig. 5
                            shows that the ‘high’ group tended to take longer to complete the task than the ‘low’ group. This is not simply that the ‘low’ group were faster, but reflects the manner in which the task was performed. The ‘high’ group tended to make more strokes per line which resulted in a higher % of blade used per stroke but each individual stroke was at a higher velocity (see below) which resulted in thinner lines because the blades were not getting stuck or twisted in the copper (hence, helping to give the lines higher subjective rating of quality).

The ‘high’ group tended to saw with significantly higher velocity than the other groups. It is worth noting that the statistical comparison (Table 4) also showed significant differences in the mean y-axis velocity, together with standard deviation of y-axis velocity and standard deviation of the standard deviation of the y-axis velocity. Our interpretation of these differences is that the ‘low’ group tended to exhibit much greater variability in their sawing action (Fig. 6
                           ).


                           Fig. 6 plots force applied against percentage of blade used, for the three levels of performance. This provides an indication of how well each group managed the functional parameters that we have identified for this task. Comparing participants with respect to force showed a significant difference (p < 0.05). As participants used a low grip force for this task, i.e., less than 20 N, which one would consider similar to a pinch rather than power group (Pheasant and Haslegrave, 2005). The ‘high’ group applied significantly lower force in their grasp of the handle during the sawing tasks (947 g, g (9.28 N) vs. 1103 g (10.82 N) and 1667 g (16.35 N) for the medium and low groups). Furthermore, the standard deviation of the force applied by the ‘high’ group was smaller than for the low group (387 g vs 548 g). As noted in section 1.3, a characteristic of the good use of piercing saw ought to be a relaxed grip. Not only does a relaxed grip provide for better moment-by-moment control of the fine blade, but it also relaxes the wrist which means that the sawing action is most likely to come from the wrist and forearm, rather than from the forearm alone (a stronger grip applied to the handle effectively reduces its freedom of movement).

Comparing participants on percentage blade used showed no significant difference.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

In this paper, the use of a piercing saw has been considered in terms of variation in performance across different experience levels. Our aim has been to develop quantitative measures, derived from data collected from sensors fitted to the saw's handle, which can allow us to distinguish between different levels of performance. We have demonstrated that performance is not simply a function of year of study, i.e., it is not the case that all of the 3rd year students performed better than all of the 1st year students. If it is not the case that performance is dictated by year of study, then it is possible that other factors are relevant for the quantification of skill. Obviously the task we have been studying is quite simple and one that the 1st year students had begun to master in the first few months of their study. Having said this, the results suggest that defining performance in terms of especially grip force and percentage of blade used is both measurable (using our sensors and analysis) and also indicative of good performance.

With the aim of progressing the quantitative study of tool use, this paper has demonstrated how data from sensors fitted to handles can provide data which is sufficiently reliable to distinguish levels of performance. This follows on from successful experimental work in instrumenting tools (Fellows and Freivalds, 1991; Kilbom et al., 1993; McGorry, 2001; McGorry et al., 2003; Murphy et al., 2000; Stoy and Aspen, 1999), and the interpretation of these data in terms of skilled performance is relatively novel in the ergonomics literature. Functional dynamics (Bril et al., 2010; Rein et al., 2013) provides a useful framework in which to explore differences in performance. While in this study we have compared the performance of 1st and 3rd year students, the intention is not to claim that the 3rd year students are ‘skilled’; we simply propose that they possess greater experience in performing these tasks. The fact that differences could be identified using the parameters derived from the sensor data provides a degree of construct validity for the approach.

In terms of the differences in performance between ‘high’ and ‘low’ performers, we propose that functional dynamics parameters for activity description (Bril et al., 2010) offer a plausible explanation. In terms of the control parameters, ‘high’ performers tended to move the saw in a faster (higher resultant velocity), more consistent (differences in standard deviation) manner than the other participants. The consistency is indicative of a smoother sawing action and the higher velocity corresponds to the larger distance travelled per stroke in the high performing group, which means that using more of the blade means higher velocity if the sawing cycle duration was reasonably similar in this case. In terms of regulatory parameters, the ‘high’ performing participants tended to exert less force on the handle of the saw, thus allowing for subtle wrist movement, and potentially exerting less force on the saw blade itself. Thus, the saw ‘did the work’ and the task of the tool user was to guide its movement rather than exert force to make the cut. In terms of regulatory parameters, as indicated by Fig. 6, the ‘high’ performers tended to apply a lower grip force than other participants. In terms of the functional parameter, it is plausible that none of the participants were focussing their attention on how much of the blade was being used but that it was simply emerging as a consequence of their activity (which is why we defined this as a functional parameter). There are many ways in which the movement of the blade can result in higher or lower percentage of the blade being used in each cut. What the results do suggest is that level of ability seems to be influenced by the grip force applied to the handle which, in term, suggests that better performance arises from a light grip leading to a smoother, more fluid movement of the saw during cutting.

Consideration of the correct use of a piercing saw suggested that the key functional parameter for this task was the percentage of blade used in each stroke (see section 3.1). This could imply that cutting actions that employ a smaller percentage of the blade, e.g., using short, rapid strokes, might be less efficient than actions which use a greater percentage of the blade, e.g., using longer strokes. Such a distinction would relate to the notion that saw ‘does the work’. On the other hand, the length of the blade (14 cm) might not be sufficient to distinguish reliably between short and long strokes. Fig. 6 suggests that, while level of ability could relate to percentage of blade used (with more of the ‘high’ participants on the right of the graph), the distribution of results are not consistent, and there is not a statistically significant effect across groups on this parameter. However, statistical analysis did show significant differences between the groups on control and regulatory parameters, suggesting that there are differences in the manner in which different participants performed the task (and that these differences are indicative of differences in level of skill and ability).

In this study, three data sets had to be excluded from analysis due to issues with the partitioning of the data or due to a broken blade. On the one hand, all three participants were from the same group (reducing the set of 1st year students from 12 to 9) and we felt this would have minimal bearing on the comparison between groups in terms of group sizes. On the other hand, we have no way of knowing how well these participants could have performed and this could have led to greater overlap between the ‘high’ and ‘low’ performers. In defence, we would point out that the aim of the paper was not to measure ‘skill’ per se, so much as to demonstrate how measurement of activity could be explored in terms of the parameters defined by Bril's conception of functional dynamics. The sample size for the analysis (N = 15) is relatively small but we feel sufficient to support the claims made in this paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

In this paper, we have sought to extend the concept of functional dynamics from flint-knapping to sawing. The main objective for this study was to identify key measures of performance (derived from the data produced by strain gauges and accelerometers mounted in a tool's handle) that could differentiate levels of performance. This has required definition of the functional, regulatory and control parameters which might characterise the task of sawing with a piercing saw. While the flint-knapping studies emphasised kinetic energy as the functional parameter (which is as to be expected when one considers that the hammering action involves the controlled force applied by the use of one stone on another), in this study we proposed that the functional parameter would be percentage of blade used. We now believe that the functional parameter involves some combination of grip force and percentage of blade used (as implied by Fig. 6). However, the point that we make is that the underlying model, of functional dynamics, created a perspective on the collection and analysis of tool-using data which was instructive and useful. This perspective emphasises the dynamic interaction between user and tool, which raises the possibility that the tool-user is managing a set of parameters as the activity unfolds (Latash, 2010). Future work will address the more complicated task of sawing and filing a disc, and use the data we have collected to develop and evaluate Dynamical Systems models to help predict variation in performance in more detail.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

We are grateful to the staff and students of the School of Jewellery, Birmingham City University who helped to organise and who participated in this study. In particular we would like to thank Jack Cunningham, Bridie Lander and Gaynor Edwards for generously allowing us access to their workshops and for recruiting participants for us.


                     
                        
                           
                              
                              
                              
                              
                                 
                                    Measure
                                    Parameters
                                    Justification
                                 
                              
                              
                                 
                                    Resultant velocity
                                    The actual instantaneous velocity of the saw handle derived from accelerometer data for all 3 axes.
                                    While the task is primarily performed in one plane (the y-axis), other axes could contribute to the motion (in terms of pitch or yaw), and taking the resultant allows this combination to be considered so that we make use of all available data.
                                 
                                 
                                    Mean y velocity
                                    The mean velocity along the y-axis (aligned with saw handle) only.
                                    The velocity of sawing motion, i.e., along the saw blade - back and forth motion of sawing strokes.
                                 
                                 
                                    sd y velocity
                                    The standard deviation of y-axis velocity.
                                    Variation in velocity of the sawing motion
                                 
                                 
                                    sd of sd y velocity
                                    The standard deviation of the standard deviation of y-axis velocity.
                                    Jerkiness of sawing motion
                                 
                                 
                                    Mean x velocity
                                    The mean velocity in the x-axis only, for each participant.
                                    The velocity of motion perpendicular to the saw blade (i.e., sideways deviation)
                                 
                                 
                                    sd x velocity
                                    The standard deviation of x-axis velocity.
                                    Variation in sideways deviation
                                 
                                 
                                    sd of sd x velocity
                                    The standard deviation of the standard deviation of x-axis velocity.
                                    Jerkiness of sideways deviation
                                 
                                 
                                    Fundamental Frequency (F0) for y-axis accelerometer data
                                    Discrete Fourier Transform applied to y-axis data.
                                    This describes the sawing motion in the frequency domain.
                                 
                                 
                                    Peak grip force
                                    Maximum output on any of the strain gauges.
                                    This measure indicates the peak strain exerted on any one of the gauges.
                                 
                                 
                                    Resultant grip force
                                    This reports the sum of the strain gauge output for each person, which is then averaged across groups.
                                    This shows the total force applied to the handle over the course of the task.
                                 
                                 
                                    Kinetic energy
                                    Energy related to the movement of the saw, see equation
                                    A measure of effort taking into account the weight of the instrumented saw.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  

The strain gauges were calibrated by applying increasing load to a single gauge and noting the ADC (Analogue to Digital Converter) output. Load was applied by fixing the bar with strain gauge into a vice (so that it acted as a cantilevered beam) and hanging weights on to it. The weights increased in 100 g units. For each weight added to the bar, the output of the strain gauge (in mV) was noted. Weights were added to a maximum load of 3000 g. This procedure was repeated four times. A linear fit was performed on these data (R2 = 0.95), which showed a consistent and repeatable pattern of activation. The resulting regression equation was used to convert mean ADC output to force, proportional to the calibration weights in grams. This was then converted to Newtons (1 N = 101.937 g).

Conversion from raw accelerometer data to velocity was required because the accelerometer gives raw output of an Analogue to Digital Converter (ADC) unit of the microcontroller inside the handle. The readings are in the range of 0–4096, which represent 0–3.3 V. The sensitivity of the accelerometer is 0.330 V/unit gravity, with zero set at half of the scale. Initial conversion, therefore, applied the following formula to each data point to give a reading of acceleration as a fraction of gravity in ‘g’:
                        
                           
                              
                                 g
                                 =
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          (
                                          
                                             r
                                             a
                                             w
                                             −
                                             2048
                                          
                                          )
                                       
                                       ×
                                       
                                          (
                                          
                                             
                                                
                                                   3.3
                                                
                                                
                                                   4096
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                          )
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       0.33
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  

Accelerometers register gravity as 1 g of upwards acceleration. As a result, gravity distorts the acceleration readings unless the motion of the handle is perfectly perpendicular to gravity, the effect increasing as the orientation becomes more vertical. This gravity component could not simply be subtracted from the readings because it was not constant, the orientation during the sawing action varied by small amounts. These variations contribute to drift, which shows up prominently when the acceleration is integrated to calculate velocity. This problem was dealt with by detrending the acceleration data by subtracting a moving average window; this was possible due to the periodic nature of the sawing action where it can be assumed that the motion in each direction is equal and therefore averages to zero, and by the highly constrained nature of the sawing task. Detrending windows were chosen to be sufficiently larger than the period of the sawing action so that it does not negate the individual sawing actions (in this analysis, the window size was 100 samples).

The conversion from acceleration to velocity was performed by integrating, using the cumulative sum of the acceleration divided by the sampling frequency. The acceleration is multiplied by gravity (9.81 m/s2) to convert the result to m/s.
                        
                           
                              
                                 
                                    v
                                    n
                                 
                                 =
                                 
                                    v
                                    
                                       n
                                       −
                                       1
                                    
                                 
                                 +
                                 
                                    (
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             
                                                g
                                                n
                                             
                                          
                                          
                                             120
                                          
                                       
                                       ×
                                       9.81
                                    
                                    )
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  

There is a drift in the result due to the sampled nature of the data, which is eliminated by detrending integrated data again. The calculation for distance is the same process, but without the need to adjust for gravity:
                        
                           
                              
                                 
                                    d
                                    n
                                 
                                 =
                                 
                                    d
                                    
                                       n
                                       −
                                       1
                                    
                                 
                                 +
                                 
                                    (
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             
                                                v
                                                n
                                             
                                          
                                          
                                             120
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    )
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  

@&#REFERENCES@&#

