@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#The implementation of ergonomics advice and the stage of change approach

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           This paper investigates the implementation of ergonomics advice tailored according to the Stage of Change approach.


                        
                        
                           
                           Companies were randomly allocated to receive tailored or standard ergonomics advice.


                        
                        
                           
                           Companies in receipt of tailored advice implemented significantly more changes.


                        
                        
                           
                           The implementation of ergonomics advice may be improved by the incorporation of Stage of Change principles.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Stage of Change

Implementation

Ergonomics interventions

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


                  This paper investigates the implementation of injury prevention advice tailored according to the Stage of Change (SOC) approach. The managers of 25 workgroups, drawn from medium to large companies across a wide range of occupational sectors were allocated to receive either standard ergonomics advice or ergonomics advice tailored according to the workgroup SOC. Twelve months after the advice was provided, semi-structured interviews were conducted with each manager. In a multivariate model, managers who had received tailored advice were found to have implemented significantly more of the recommended changes (IRR = 1.68, 95% CI 1.07–2.63) and more “additional” changes (IRR = 1.90, 95% CI 1.12–3.20). Qualitative analysis identified that the key barriers and facilitators to the implementation of changes were largely related to worker resistance to change and the attitudes of senior managers towards health and safety. The findings from this study suggest that the implementation of ergonomics recommendations may be improved by the tailoring of advice according to SOC principles.
               

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

In professional practice ergonomics and injury prevention advice commonly comprises a series of recommended changes to work systems, the work environment and individual work practices (Rothmore et al., 2013). However, even when actively sought, this advice may not be fully implemented or simply ignored (Trevelyan and Haslam, 2001). Compounding this is the absence of routine evaluation by ergonomics consultants of the implementation and effectiveness of the advice provided (Whysall et al., 2004).

The paucity of evaluation to explore the implementation of ergonomics advice provided by professional ergonomics consultants has been primarily related to client/company disinterest due to the associated costs, but also in part, due to the consultants’ views that requests for evaluation might indicate a lack of confidence in the effectiveness of the interventions they had proposed (Whysall et al., 2004). Reasons for the lack of implementation of advice may include issues of cost, concerns over effectiveness, a lack of understanding of company priorities on the part of the consultant engaged or simply a lack of “desire” on the part of the company to introduce change (Trevelyan and Haslam, 2001). These factors suggest the need for consultants to frame their advice in a manner which will maximise its potential adoption (Rothmore et al., 2013).

Injury prevention advice typically proposes changes to the work environment, work systems and individual work practices (Rothmore et al., 2013). Such changes inevitably involve a change in behaviour.

Various methods have been proposed to improve the implementation and effectiveness of ergonomics advice according to behaviour change principles (DeJoy, 1996; Haslam, 2002; Urlings et al., 1990). The most frequently applied of the behaviour change methods in workplace settings has been Prochaska and DiClemente's Stage of Change (SOC) framework (Barrett et al., 2005; Prochaska et al., 2001; Village and Ostry, 2010; Whysall et al., 2006a, 2006b) in which readiness to change is assessed using a short series of closed questions after which they are assigned to one of five stages:
                           
                              1.
                              Pre-contemplation (unaware or unconcerned about workplace hazards)

Contemplation (considering change but not yet ready to act)

Preparation (intend to change in the near future)

Action (made changes in the previous 6 months)

Maintenance (made changes and are working to consolidate gains and avoid relapse)

Advice is then tailored, according to the stage of change, in order to improve receptiveness. For example, while those in the more advanced stages will benefit from practical information on how to make, or maintain change, those in the earlier stages will benefit from information on the risks and hazards linked with their current behaviour and actions, which may encourage progression onto later stages.

The SOC approach has been evaluated by measuring progression through the various stages of change, post-intervention, assuming that those in more advanced stages will be more “risk aware” and therefore adopt less risky behaviour (Barrett et al., 2005; Whysall et al., 2006b). Other measures have included changes in self-reported body part discomfort or safety culture as indicators of effectiveness (Whysall et al., 2006b).

In their study of workplace interventions using the SOC approach, Whysall et al. (2006b) reported that organisations in receipt of SOC-based ergonomics advice were significantly more effective in promoting risk awareness and desired safety behaviour among their workers. Significant reductions in worker self-reported body part discomfort were also reported. These health benefits and risk awareness changes were maintained at 15 and 20 months post-intervention (Shaw et al., 2007).

Potential barriers to the implementation of advice exist not only at the consultant/client interface but also at the manager/worker level. When Whysall et al. (2006a) interviewed company managers who were responsible for implementing workplace changes designed to reduce the incidence of musculoskeletal disorders the strongest reported barriers included: resistance to change by employees; difficulties in gaining senior manager authorisation for change; and managers’ attitudes to health and safety in general. While the tailoring of advice according to the SOC approach may be effective in overcoming resistance to change, empirical evidence, while encouraging, is limited.

Using a mixed methods approach the aims of this study were:
                           
                              •
                              To determine whether the rate of implementation of ergonomics and injury prevention advice provided to companies could be improved if it was tailored according stage of change principles, and

To identify the barriers and facilitators experienced by managers in the implementation of the proposed changes

@&#METHODS@&#

Purposive sampling was used to select medium-large organisations from industry groups in South Australia known to be at high risk of musculoskeletal injury according to statistical data from the State's Workers' Compensation Authority. These organisations were contacted via e-mail or telephone. Each participating organisation was asked to recruit 10 to 20 of its own employees (on a voluntary basis) who performed substantially similar tasks, were members of the same identifiable workgroup and were employed on an ongoing basis. Participating companies were classified for industry sector based on the Australian and New Zealand Industrial Classification system (Australian Bureau of Statistics, 2002). Company size was determined based on the Australian Bureau of Statistics definitions of – medium (more than 20 but less than 200 employees), and large (more than 200 employees). Twenty-five workgroups (comprising a total of 343 workers) from a variety of industry sectors were recruited (Table 1
                        ).

@&#PROCEDURE@&#

All members of the workgroups completed an individual, short questionnaire to identify their ‘Stage of Change’. Each of the participating companies was subsequently visited by the same ergonomist in a 2–3 h site visit. Based on direct observation, and informal discussions with employees, a report was prepared for the company managers detailing the observations made and suggested improvements/solutions.

Approximately equal numbers of workgroups were then randomly assigned to either the “standard” or “tailored” arm of the study. Randomisation was conducted by an independent researcher using a randomising function in Microsoft Excel.

At the time of the worksite visit and the development of the recommendations both the ergonomist and company managers were blind to the allocation of each workgroup. During the implementation of the intervention, however, blinding was not possible.

Those organisations in the “standard” group received a report with suggested control measures which were based on ergonomics principles. Organisations in the “tailored” group received a report with suggested control measures, also based on ergonomics principles, but prioritised according to the workgroup SOC profile. Where the SOC differed within a workgroup the recommended changes took account of the distribution of the workers’ identified stage and included recommendations relevant to each stage present in the workgroup. These were discussed at the follow-up visit in the context of the SOC profile of the workgroup. The managers to whom the recommendations were provided were then responsible for the selection and implementation of the changes. This allowed for the provision of intervention advice at the workgroup level, with the additional benefit of preserving individual confidentiality.

A report template was developed and standardised for both the standard and tailored recommendations. These were submitted for peer review by an academic with expertise in the development of ergonomics recommendations and subsequently modified, based on feedback received, prior to their use. The following format was used for each report:


                        Background Information - This included the demographics of those staff who were interviewed and any other sources of information which were used in the development of the recommended changes (e.g. company job dictionaries).


                        Tasks observed - This comprised a list of tasks which were directly observed and those which were simulated.


                        Observations and Recommendations - These were subdivided into categories of known risk factors for musculoskeletal injury (Bernard, 1997) – i.e. postures, forces, repetitive movement, work organisation, the work environment and any other relevant observations.


                        Recommendations - These included both higher order (i.e. the introduction of engineering solutions to eliminate the risks observed) and lower order control measures (i.e. the introduction of administrative changes to reduce workplace exposure when elimination was not possible).


                        Standard Guidance Material – Copies of guidance material published by the State Regulatory Authority relevant to any of the recommendations made was included.

Those organisations in the tailored intervention group also received explanatory notes on the SOC rationale and the workgroup SOC distribution as justification for the “tailored” recommendations. Due to the complexity of the SOC information, a follow-up visit to company managers responsible for the implementation of tailored advice was undertaken in order to explain the rationale for the SOC approach.

All managers (tailored and standard) were interviewed 12 months later to discuss the following issues (as piloted with a non-study workplace manager):
                           
                              •
                              Changes implemented, including the number, type and timing of any recommended changes which were implemented as well as any other workplace changes which had been introduced

Changes planned but not yet implemented

Barriers and facilitators experienced by the manager in the implementation of workplace changes

Budgeting questions including the method of budgeting for OHS initiatives within the company and the level of manager discretionary budgetary control

@&#ANALYSIS@&#

This study adopted a “mixed-methods” approach.

Quantitative data were entered in Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS) Version 20®. The outcome variables included the total number, type, and timing of recommended changes that were implemented, and the number and type of “additional” changes implemented by the organisations. The changes implemented were dichotomised into higher order or lower order solutions. Higher order solutions included elimination or engineering strategies. Lower order solutions included such actions as the provision of training programs and the introduction of job rotation. The timing of the introduced changes was dichotomised into either “less than 6 months” or “6–12 months” following receipt of the report.

Initial, bivariate analyses using independent samples t-tests were conducted for each outcome variable to identify an intervention effect. Despite the randomisation of companies to the standard and tailored approaches, there remained potentially important differences in the characteristics of the companies in the two groups. Poisson regression models were fitted for each outcome variable, including a binary intervention variable (i.e. Standard or Tailored), and variables representing workload, company size, manager age/experience and budgetary control of the manager to control for potential confounding factors. In the final models statistical significance was defined as a two-tailed p-value of 0.05 or less. Group allocation (i.e. Standard or Tailored) was included in all the final models. The resultant incident rate ratios (IRR) are interpreted as the ratio of uptake in the tailored group relative to the standard group.

This study also adopted a thematic analysis of the qualitative data obtained within a realist epistemological position. Whilst the coding of the data was conducted inductively this was focused at what has been described as the semantic level (Braun and Clarke, 2006) across the whole data set with the transcribed responses of each interview being read, re-read and coded openly and independently by two members of the research team. Open coding was conducted through identifying and labelling each discrete incident, idea or concept expressed during the interview. Where labels coincided, this allowed comparison between transcripts. Conceptual labels were grouped together to develop themes which were compared between researchers. Definitions were discussed in relation to the original data and refined. Relationships between themes were also explored, discussed and interpreted.

@&#RESULTS@&#


                        Table 1 presents descriptive statistics for industry sector, nature of work, company size, and manager characteristics. Small companies (those with less than 20 employees) did not participate in this study.


                        Table 1 presents descriptive statistics for the participating workplace managers’ age, experience and whether they had control of an OHS budget. The average age of the managers interviewed was 47.68 years (ranging from 32 to 62 years). The average length of tenure in their current position was 4.31 years (ranging from 0.33 to 20 years). There were no significant differences in the age, experience or level of personal control of the OHS budget between the managers in the standard or tailored groups.

From Table 2
                         it can be seen that there were no significant differences in the number, or nature, of the recommended changes proposed. There were, however, significant differences between the companies. Those in receipt of tailored advice implemented 2.95 more recommended changes (95% CI 0.21–5.69) – primarily driven by the implementation of 1.92 more lower order changes (95% CI 0.28–3.57). They also introduced 1.56 more additional (non-recommended changes) (95% CI 0.05–3.08) and 4.51 more total (i.e. recommended and additional) changes (95% CI 1.59–7.43).

There were no significant differences between the companies in receipt of standard or tailored advice in the planning of future changes.

Poisson regression models, to control for manager and organisational characteristics, were developed for each of the outcome variables of interest.


                        Table 3
                         shows that managers in receipt of tailored advice introduced significantly more recommended changes (IRR = 1.68, 95% CI 1.07–2.63), more additional changes (IRR = 1.90, 95% CI 1.12 3.20) and more total changes (recommended + additional) (IRR = 2.09, 95% CI 1.43–3.10).

There was no significant difference in the implementation of higher order changes between the two groups, however, those in receipt of tailored advice implemented significantly more lower order recommended changes (IRR = 2.06, 95% CI 1.08–3.91). Managers in receipt of tailored advice implemented significantly more of the recommended higher order controls (IRR = 3.25, 95% CI 1.14–10.80) between 6 and 12 months following the receipt of the advice and significantly more additional lower order controls (IRR = 7.34, 95% CI 1.69–31.81).

There were no significant differences between the standard and tailored groups in the number of workplace changes planned. However, there were significant associations between managers with control of the OHS budget and the planned implementation of future changes.

The themes which emerged addressing barriers from accounts provided by managers were similar between the standard and tailored intervention companies. However, the number of managers who reported experiencing specific barriers was different, with five of the 13 managers in the standard advice group reporting that they faced no specific barriers when implementing OHS-related changes compared with only one manager in the tailored advice group.

Barriers were conceptualized at organisational, workgroup managerial or employee-level.

At the organisational level the most frequently mentioned barrier related to budgetary constraints and resources:

At the workgroup managerial level the difficulty in overcoming entrenched attitudes were highlighted:
                              “Middle Managers are always focussed on production targets but these must be achieved with safety in mind.” (Company 2)
                           
                        

Barriers at the employee level were also specifically highlighted:
                              “Employees have been resistant to changes like job rotation and a reduction in the need to lift heavy items … Staff have complained of increased discomfort due to a lack of exercise … and that they are becoming fat.” (Company 1)
                           
                        

At the organisational level themes relating to facilitation of change were most frequently related to a direction from senior management:
                              “New Senior Management team is more safety aware … this is a national directive.” (Company 3)
                           
                        

At the workgroup managerial level general awareness and communication were highlighted as important facilitators:
                              “There has been a definite increase in the awareness of risk among managers. The ergonomics report and associated information was tabled at manager's meeting.”(Company 1)
                           
                        

Similar factors were reported at the employee level:
                              “OHS is now a monthly agenda item which has improved consultation – both by staff who can raise issues and by management who can advise staff of upcoming activities.”(Company 4)
                           
                        

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

This paper has reported on a mixed methods evaluation of injury prevention advice tailored according to the SOC approach. The randomised quantitative component found that at 12-month follow-up, the companies in receipt of tailored advice had implemented recommended changes at a rate more than 60% higher than the standard group. This higher rate of implementation was seen primarily in the introduction of lower order changes, which were introduced at more than twice the rate in the tailored group. When the time to implementation was dichotomised into <6 months or 6–12 months following the receipt of advice, companies in receipt of tailored advice had introduced higher order changes at more than three times the rate of those in receipt of standard advice in 6–12 months. This is consistent with the forward budgetary planning required for more expensive higher order changes to workplace environments.

Differences in the implementation of “additional” changes - workplace modifications designed to reduce the burden of musculoskeletal disorders, but which were not specifically recommended - between the two groups was marked. Those companies in the tailored group had implemented additional changes at nearly twice the rate when compared with the standard group. We propose that this may be indicative of a larger effect of the behaviour change approach. This suggests the potential for incorporation and integration of behaviour change information as part of a decision-making process within companies rather than just as a means of encouraging the implementation of specified advice.

When the additional changes were dichotomised as higher order or lower order their implementation was also related to company size. Higher rates of implementation for higher order changes were seen in larger companies with a corresponding lower rate of introduction for lower order changes. Large companies also planned the introduction of additional higher order changes at significantly higher rates than medium sized companies. While not specifically confirmed in our study this is probably related to greater financial resources and in-house expertise.

Even when actively sought, proposed workplace changes may not be implemented (Haslam, 2002; Whysall et al., 2006a). In their exploratory study, Whysall et al. (2006a) analysed the barriers and facilitators reported by workplace managers responsible for the introduction of ergonomics changes. They reported that the barriers and facilitators were primarily related to managerial commitment, managerial attitudes and workers' resistance to change. It was suggested that the use of behaviour change theories in the development of workplace interventions may facilitate their implementation. In our qualitative component, we identified similar themes. However, in contrast to the findings of Whysall et al. (2006a) who reported worker resistance as the most commonly cited barrier to the implementation of workplace change, in our study budgetary constraint was the dominant barrier. This is unsurprising considering that our study occurred at the zenith of the global financial crisis when many companies were experiencing severe financial strain. Of particularly interest however, is the relatively large proportion of managers (5/13) in the standard arm of the study who reported having experienced ‘no specific barriers’ to the implementation of workplace changes. Logically, this should have allowed the introduction of the recommended changes at a greater rate than in the tailored group. In fact, those who reported experiencing ‘no specific barriers’ had implemented, or had plans to implement, only one of the 32 recommended changes they received. Rather than not having experienced barriers we suggest that these OHS managers may have been more likely to have been unaware of workplace barriers themselves. Paradoxically, we have reported a higher rate of implementation for the recommended workplace changes among those managers who reported experiencing more barriers – those in the tailored group. The majority of these managers (8/12) reported that the information they received on the ‘stage of change’ distribution of their respective workgroups was useful, and had either influenced their choice of workplace changes or had influenced others in their organisation. This is supported by the results of the multivariate analysis.

Ergonomics consultants proposing workplace changes frequently have little influence over their implementation. Even when actively sought, ergonomics and injury prevention recommendations may not be fully implemented, or are simply ignored (Rothmore et al., 2013; Trevelyan and Haslam, 2001). Possible reasons include the perceived effectiveness of the recommendations or simply a lack of desire on the part of the company to introduce change (Rothmore et al., 2013). Strategies to improve the implementation of advice are therefore needed.

Previous studies using the SOC approach in workplaces have shown its potential benefits by either applying it to pre-existing company plans (Whysall et al., 2006c) or by demonstrating its ability to identify worker readiness to change as a prelude to development of an intervention (Village and Ostry, 2010). While these methods provide a useful demonstration for its potential effectiveness in the development of workplace interventions they are not reflective of professional practice where consultants are engaged to provide specific advice on changes to the work environment. Consequently, practitioners may not see this approach as being immediately and directly relevant to their own practice. In our study, we have applied the SOC approach in a manner more closely aligned with professional practice where consultants are engaged to observe and evaluate the work environment and provide recommendations for its improvement.

@&#LIMITATIONS@&#

While comparable reports were provided to companies in the standard and tailored groups it was decided to supplement these for companies in receipt of the tailored advice with a visit to explain its rationale (they had been previously blinded to their group allocation). Standard practice amongst consultants varies and may include sending final reports or arranging follow-up visits to present and discuss their findings. For pragmatic reasons we elected to send reports to those in the standard group. It is possible that if the managers in the standard practice group had also received an additional visit, the observed effect size may have been reduced.

Studies conducted in dynamic work environments are also subject to the effects of uncontrolled workplace changes including company policy changes and general workplace improvements. While we were unaware of such changes in our sample they were not specifically accounted for in our analyses.

Our sample of 25 workgroups from a variety of industry sectors is similar in size to previously reported studies which have incorporated the SOC approach in occupational settings (Whysall et al., 2006b). While promising, there is a need to replicate our findings in a larger study in order to account for any potential imbalances, despite randomisation, in the standard and tailored arms of our study.

We considered that small companies (those with less than 20 employees) would be less likely to employ OHS consultants and would pose greater challenges in the recruitment of sufficiently large workgroups. They were therefore not included in our study. Our results are therefore not generalisable beyond medium-large organisations.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

The results of this study suggest that the tailoring of advice according to behaviour-change principles can improve its implementation. Not only were recommended changes implemented at a higher rate in companies which received tailored advice but they also introduced more additional changes (i.e. changes which were not specifically proposed). This may be indicative of a larger effect for the behaviour change approach within organisations. Larger studies are needed to confirm this.

The field of musculoskeletal injury prevention is dominated by practitioners with an ergonomics or physical/occupational therapy background. Consequently the development of interventions with a behavioural focus may not be seen as immediately relevant in professional practice although it has been suggested that this may be more related to a lack of suitable techniques in their repertoire.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

We thank the participating companies, and SafeWork South Australia for funding support, under the Commissioned Research Grants Scheme.

SafeWork SA and the South Australian Government do not endorse the content of this material and the views expressed herein are not reflective of SafeWork SA or the South Australian Government.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

