@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Social influence in a virtual tunnel fire – Influence of conflicting information on evacuation behavior

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Virtual Reality (VR) experiment on conflicting social information during a fire emergency in a road tunnel.


                        
                        
                           
                           Actions of a virtual agent (VA) affected participants evacuation destination choice and travel paths.


                        
                        
                           
                           If the VA stayed passive, participants waited longer and moved longer distances until they reached the emergency exit.


                        
                        
                           
                           If the VA stayed passive or moved away from the emergency exit, less participants moved to the emergency exit.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Tunnel evacuation

Social influence

Virtual reality

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


                  Evacuation from a smoke filled tunnel requires quick decision-making and swift action from the tunnel occupants. Technical installations such as emergency signage aim to guide tunnel occupants to the closest emergency exits. However, conflicting information may come from the behavior of other tunnel occupants. We examined if and how conflicting social information may affect evacuation in terms of delayed and/or inadequate evacuation decisions and behaviors. To this end, forty participants were repeatedly situated in a virtual reality smoke filled tunnel with an emergency exit visible to one side of the participants. Four social influence conditions were realized. In the control condition participants were alone in the tunnel, while in the other three experimental conditions a virtual agent (VA) was present. In the no-conflict condition, the VA moved to the emergency exit. In the active conflict condition, the VA moved in the opposite direction of the emergency exit. In the passive conflict condition, the VA stayed passive. Participants were less likely to move to the emergency exit in the conflict conditions compared to the no-conflict condition. Pre-movement and movement times in the passive conflict condition were significantly delayed compared to all other conditions. Participants moved the longest distances in the passive conflict condition. These results support the hypothesis that social influence affects evacuation behavior, especially passive behavior of others can thwart an evacuation to safety.
               

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Road tunnel emergencies are rare yet potentially life-threatening events. After major tunnel fires in European road tunnels, new safety standards were developed (e.g., Directive 2004/54/EC) making road tunnels safer (Amundsen, 1994; Amundsen and Ranes, 2000). Safe tunnel evacuation requires adequate decision-making by tunnel occupants under time pressure and observations from recent tunnel fires document problematic occupant behavior (Burns et al., 2013).

Prompt self-evacuation during tunnel fires is very important since tunnel fires can spread rapidly and differ significantly from other fire types in important aspects. Unlike in other open fires, vehicles can burn more vigorously due to heat feedback effects in the confined spaces of tunnels. In addition, the ventilation airflow may alter the ventilation flow pattern which can spread toxic gases and smoke over the tunnel. The ventilation system and other aspects of the tunnel architecture affect the maximum heat release rate, the risk of flashovers, and the development of stratified smoke. Typically, the smoke moves in layers, away from the fire along the tunnel ceiling. Due to the smoke cooling down or to strong ventilation, the smoke may spread down and mix with lower layers of air (For an overview, see Ingason, 2012; Purser, 2008). The formation of smoke influences the visibility in the tunnel, which in turn reduces walking speed and ultimately prolongs the evacuation time of occupants (Fridolf et al., 2013a,b; Ronchi et al., 2011). Furthermore, smoke not only affects the visibility but is also a major threat to occupant safety since it contains large quantities of asphyxiant gases and irritants (Purser, 2008).

The recommended behavior for tunnel occupants in case of a fire is to stop their vehicle at a safe distance (more than 50 m away) from the fire source on the side of the carriageway, switch off the engine, switch on the hazard flasher, and leave the vehicle immediately while leaving the keys in the ignition lock. If feasible, occupants should provide first-aid to other occupants and try to extinguish the fire. If the latter is not possible, they should move to the next emergency exit (Egger, 2012). Unfortunately, observations from various tunnel fires show that occupants do not evacuate immediately (Shields, 2012). Interestingly, many occupants are aware of safety installations in road tunnels, but the intention to use them seems to be not internalized (Gandit et al., 2009). Most people have no practical experience of tunnel evacuation and behavioral scripts and routines for such emergency situations are not available. Hence, tunnel occupants have to rely on their appraisal of the situation, their resources (e.g., general knowledge about evacuation), and other sources of information (e.g., behavior of others) they deem credible.

Several studies have addressed tunnel evacuation. In a field study, participants were confronted with a simulated tunnel emergency. Results showed that passivity was highly prevalent and some participants waited over 5 min before considering evacuation, including the ones who were situated adjacent to a burning heavy goods vehicle. Safety installations such as emergency exits were not recognized either (Boer, 2002; Boer and van Zanten, 2007). Another evacuation study revealed that many occupants comprehend the threat during tunnel accidents, but do not know how to evacuate properly (Nilsson et al., 2009). Lack of knowledge and practical training about adequate safety behavior in road tunnels has been shown to be associated with passivity (Kinateder et al., 2013). Perceived relative safety inside one's own vehicle compared to the tunnel environment and reluctance to leave property behind are hypothesized to be the underlying causes of passivity (Gandit et al., 2009; Ronchi et al., 2012). Property attachment has been shown to be a predictor of non-evacuation in other fields such as hurricane and flood evacuation (Riad et al., 1999; Siebeneck and Cova, 2012). However, there are no empirical studies that directly investigate the effect of property attachment to tunnel evacuation.

How do tunnel occupants navigate toward a place of safety during tunnel emergencies? Occupants have to rely on little accessible information. One study found that participants seem to use emergency signage to find an emergency exit in a smoke filled rail tunnel (Fridolf et al., 2013a,b). However, there is also a tendency to move back toward the tunnel entrance portal and to not use the most efficient evacuation path, for e.g., the closest emergency exit (Sime, 1985). The affiliative model hypothesizes that occupants tend to move toward familiar places during emergencies (Sime, 1999, 2001). Support for this model has been found in several studies. For example, observations from fire drills in a department store showed that many occupants walked back to the main entrance of the stores, passing several emergency exits on their way out (Frantzich, 2001). Such evacuation behavior is inadequate and surprising since most road tunnels are relatively simply designed environments (in comparison to, for e.g., department stores) in which emergency exits as well as signage are generally clearly visible under normal conditions. Thus, finding an emergency exit should be easy (Egger, 2012; Shields, 2012). However, fire emergency conditions, smoke, noise, or vehicles may reduce the visibility of safety installations and make finding an emergency exit more difficult.

Why do tunnel occupants have problems evacuating adequately? There are a number of potentially important human factors that affect occupant evacuation from tunnel fires (e.g., occupant characteristics such as familiarity with tunnels; for an overview, see Shields, 2012). Despite the relatively simple architecture of most tunnels, tunnel accidents or fires are complex situations. Information processing and decision making may be limited by ambiguous or conflicting information since the physical environment may become very difficult to interpret (e.g., emergency signage and smoke may be hidden by smoke or other vehicles). In unclear situations, the behavior of other tunnel occupants may be considered as a useful source of information. Since tunnel emergencies are novel and potentially ambiguous situations for most tunnel occupants, diffusion of responsibility may lead to delayed or inadequate evacuation decisions. This was demonstrated in a classic experimental study which showed that passive behavior of others may thwart immediate evacuation (Latane and Darley, 1968). A more recent study also demonstrated that social influence becomes more important if information is limited or ambiguous (Nilsson and Johansson, 2009). In another study, some participants started evacuating spontaneously only after they saw another person doing so (Boer, 2002; Boer and van Zanten, 2007). One VR study showed no effect of passive co-drivers on evacuation decision making in a simulated tunnel fire (Kinateder et al., 2012). However, experimental studies on this topic are still scarce, and it is unclear how exactly social influence affects evacuation behavior.

It is ethically and methodologically problematic to expose participants to real emergency situations in a laboratory, and observations from real events lack experimental control. Innovative methods to better understand human behavior in emergencies include hypothetical scenarios (Lawson et al., 2013). Although these hypothetical scenarios have been shown to be useful, they rely on subjective statements and not on actual behavioral data. Virtual reality (VR) is another novel approach in evacuation research. VR allow generation of complex realistic scenarios to collect behavioral data with high experimental control. So far, VR has been used in the context of emergency evacuation to study effects of behavioral training (Kinateder et al., 2013; Ribeiro et al., 2012), general pre-evacuation behavior (Kobes et al., 2010a,b), way-finding installations (Duarte et al., 2014; Kobes et al., 2010a; Tang et al., 2009), and general environmental features (Vilar et al., 2013).

Evacuation from tunnel fires can be broadly divided into four phases: 1) Inception of the event, 2) Perception and recognition of fire cues, 3) Decision-making, and 4) Evacuation (Noizet, 2012). The purpose of the present study was to investigate evacuation behavior of tunnel occupants during the evacuation phase. The evacuation phase can be subdivided into a pre-movement and a movement phase. The pre-movement phase is defined as the time occupants need from the beginning of an event until they start evacuating. The movement phase comprises the time in which occupants actually move during evacuation until they reach either an emergency exit, another safe destination, or stop moving (Purser and Bensilum, 2001). The specific goal of the present study was to shed light on the question of how conflicting social cues affect participants' behavior during the pre-movement and movement phases. To address this question, participants were repeatedly situated in varying scenarios in a virtual road tunnel filled with smoke. During the study, the presence and behavior of an animated virtual agent (VA) was systematically varied in order to investigate its social influence on the participants' behavior in the scenario. The following hypotheses were tested in the present study:
                        
                           1.
                           
                              Pre-movement phase: The VA exerts social influence which affects the certainty and speed with which decisions are made in the pre-movement phase. We assume that conflicting information from the VA (passive behavior or running away from the emergency exit) prolongs participants' pre-movement time.


                              Movement phase: In general, tunnel occupants comply with emergency signage and, thus, participants move toward the emergency exit more frequently than in other directions. Social influence affects the destination choice: If the VA moves to the emergency exit, participants are more likely to do so, compared to conditions with no VA present. Similarly, participants are less likely to move to the emergency exit, if the VA moves in the opposite direction of the emergency exit than in conditions with no VA. In addition, we hypothesized that a passive VA or a VA moving away from the emergency exit prolongs the movement time.

@&#MATERIAL AND METHODS@&#

Forty participants (mean age: M = 21.13 years, SD = 2.38; mean driving experience in years: M = 4.13, SD = 3.01; 21 female participants; Table 1
                        ) were recruited at the University of Würzburg. Driving experience was assessed for the present study because it may reflect tunnel safety knowledge, which is part of the German theoretical driving curriculum since 2008. Since anxiety and fear may possibly influence evacuation behavior, state and trait anxiety (STAI; Laux et al., 1981; Spielberger et al., 1970), and tunnel anxiety (TAQ; Mühlberger and Pauli, 2000) were assessed. There was a significant increase in state anxiety immediately after the experiment, t (39) = 6.45, p < .001, d = −1.44. In addition, presence and simulator sickness were assessed after the experiment using the iGroup Presence Questionnaire (IPQ; Schubert, 2003) and the Simulator Sickness Questionnaire (SSQ; Kennedy et al., 1993). Participants were mainly psychology students who received course credit for their participation.

The study was conducted at the VR laboratory of the Department of Psychology I at the University of Würzburg, Germany. The laboratory (36 m2) contained a 325 × 200 cm (width × height) Powerwall (3Dims GmbH, Frankfurt, Germany). VR scenes were presented stereoscopically by two video projectors (projectiondesign F32, resolution: WUXGA, 1920 × 1200; projectiondesign, Gamle Fredrikstad, Norway). Participants wore passive circularly polarized glasses for 3D effects (Fig. 1
                        ).

Virtual environments were based on an in-house written Source-SDK Modification (VrSessionMod 0.3) and used the Source Engine (Valve, Bellevue, Washington, USA). Experimental control and VR-data acquisition were established using the VR-simulation software CyberSession 5.4 (VTplus GmbH, Würzburg, Germany; see www.cybersession.info for detailed information). Participants stood 2 m away from the Powerwall. Navigation within the simulation was implemented using a standard cordless gamepad: Participants could move with a fixed speed (2.86 m/s) by using a small joystick on the gamepad. Interaction with the virtual environment was possible by pressing a button on the gamepad (Logitech Rumblepad; Logitech, Morges, Switzerland).

@&#EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN@&#

The experiment used a 4 × 2 × 2 mixed design. The independent variables were four social influence conditions (within subjects; control condition, no conflict condition, passive conflict condition, active conflict condition), two emergency exit locations (within subjects; emergency exit left vs right of the participants), and two trial-orders (between subjects, trial-order A and B). In total, eight different tunnel trials were created (see Table 2
                         for overview of the experimental design).

In each trial, participants were standing in a virtual two-bore uni-directional road tunnel filled with smoke (dimensions: ca. 32 × 8 m; Fig. 2
                        ). The total size of the tunnel cross-section was 9.50 m, in accordance with German Standards (RABT, 2006), consisting of one carriageway with two lanes (each 3.75 m wide) and sidewalks (each 1 m wide). Dynamic but non-spreading smoke was rendered in the simulated tunnel in order to produce reduced visibility conditions. The approximate visibility range was 8–15 m for light-reflecting objects (Jin, 2008). Smoke was rendered in layered volumes, with higher densities toward the tunnel ceiling (Ingason, 2012). The starting-position was outside of a vehicle and participants faced the tunnel wall with the emergency exit (left in driving direction). Left or right from the participants' starting-position, an emergency exit was visible through the smoke. The exit became visible from the starting-position only if the participants turned left or right depending on the starting position. On the tunnel wall left in driving direction (with emergency exit), just in front of the starting-position, a standard back-lit emergency signage indicated the direction of the emergency exit (European Commission, 2004). Standard European Emergency signage was available in the tunnel every 25 m in accordance with German legislation (Bundesanstalt für Straßenwesen, 2006). Four cars were positioned on the lane next to the emergency exit. See Fig. 2 for a schematic overview of the experimental setup.

The four experimental conditions systematically varied the presence and the behavior of an animated VA. The VA represented a middle aged man. In the first condition, no VA was present (control condition). In the second condition, the VA ran to the emergency exit and consequently no conflicting information about adequate evacuation behavior was displayed (no-conflict condition). In the third condition, participants received conflicting information about adequate behavior: An animated VA stood in front of the participants' starting-position and after a delay of 1.5 s moved approximately 2 m toward the participants' starting-position and then ran in the opposite direction of the emergency exit (active conflict condition). In the fourth condition, participants also received conflicting information about adequate behavior: Here, the VA stayed passive and stood still during the whole trial (passive conflict condition).

Trial-order and the location of the emergency exit served as control variables: In order to prevent effects of the trial-order, participants were randomly assigned to one of the two trial-orders (trial-order A and B, see Table 2). There were no significant differences in socio-demographic and questionnaire data between the participants who went through trial-order A or B. The location of the emergency exit was varied systematically. In each experimental condition, the emergency exit was presented once left and once right from the participants' starting-position to balance out any side preferences of the participants.

The main dependent variables were the different behaviors shown by the participants. Frequencies of specific destination choices were coded into three distinct categories:
                           
                              1.
                              Participant moved to the emergency exit.

Participant moved away from the emergency exit and into the tunnel. This means that the participant turned right (left) if the emergency exit was left (right) from the starting position.

Participant moved past the emergency exit and into the tunnel. This means that the participant turned left (right) if the emergency exit was left (right) from the starting position.

In addition, pre-movement and movement times were calculated for each participant. Pre-movement time was measured from trial start until a participant started to move. It reflects the time a participant needs until he or she begins evacuating. Movement time was measured from the moment a participant started moving until the trial ended. It reflects the time for which a participant actually moves through the tunnel. Furthermore, the lengths of movement-trajectories were analyzed and trajectories were plotted for each participant.

@&#PROCEDURE@&#

Prior to conducting the experiment, ethical clearance was granted by the ethics committee of the Medical Faculty of the University of Würzburg, and all participants gave their informed consent. After the participants arrived at the laboratory, they read a text in which they were informed that they would take part in an experiment about tunnel safety and signed an informed consent form. Participants filled in questionnaires (STAI-state and trait; TAQ), positioned in front of the Powerwall, put on glasses for 3D presentation, and a training virtual environment was loaded. The first scene of the training environment was a virtual extension of the laboratory. By going “through” the screen with the gamepad, participants were teleported into the training environment. In the training environment, participants practiced navigation in the virtual world with the gamepad. The training environment consisted of a maze and participants were instructed to find the exit. The maze required several turns in the virtual environment to ensure that every participant was sufficiently familiar with the navigation procedure. A vehicle was placed adjacent to the end of the maze. When the participants reached the vehicle they were instructed to enter it by pressing a button on the gamepad and the training was completed.

After the participants were sufficiently familiarized with the navigation in the virtual world, the experimenter loaded a camera drive through the virtual tunnel. The participants were instructed that they are in a long road tunnel filled with smoke, they had left their vehicle and smoke was moving through the tunnel. Finally, the participants found themselves again in the first scene (virtual extension of the laboratory). By going “through” the screen again with the gamepad, participants started the experiment and the eight trials were presented. After each trial, the screen faded to black and after an interval of 7 s the next trial was loaded. A trial ended if a participant either went to the emergency exit, opened the door of a vehicle, walked past the vehicles in the tunnel, or automatically after 2 min. After the experiment, the participants filled in questionnaires (STAI-state; SSQ; IPQ). Prior to leaving, participants were debriefed, thanked, and received course credits.

@&#RESULTS@&#

The significance level was set at p = .05. Marginally significant was defined as .1 > p > .05. If corrections for multiple testing were necessary, marginally significant referred to .05 > p > .05/k for k tests. In order to assess if the trial-order had an influence on trial-duration, the trial-orders A and B were compared for the pre-movement and movement phases. With the exception of one condition (no-conflict condition, emergency exit left from starting-position), trial-order had no influence on any of the variables. After Bonferroni correction for eight tests (α
                     adj = .006), the differences in the aforementioned condition were only marginally significant (.05 > p > .006). Therefore, trial-order seemed to have no systematic influence on pre-movement and movement times and was not considered in the following analysis. Assuming a small effect size (η
                     p
                     2 = .30), an a priori power analysis for a 4 × 2 repeated measures ANOVA with a two level between factor, and a level of α = .05 suggests a sample size of N = 18 to achieve a power value of .97.

A 4 × 2 repeated measures ANOVA with the factors social influence condition (4, within subjects), location of emergency exit (2, within subjects) and the dependent variable pre-movement time was conducted. The dependent variable reflects the time that the participants need from the beginning of a trial until they start moving. There was a significant main effect of social influence conditions on pre-movement time, F(3, 304) = 3.30, p < .05, η
                        p
                        2 = .08, and a marginally significant main effect of the exit-location on pre-movement time, F(1, 304) = 3.61, p = .06, η
                        p
                        2 = .09. There was also a significant interaction between social influence conditions and exit-location on pre-movement time, F(3, 304) = 3.59, p < .05, η
                        p
                        2 = .08. Planned contrast analysis revealed that participants waited significantly longer before they started moving in the passive conflict condition if the trial started at the right starting position than in all other conditions (Fig. 3
                        ).

Destination choice, movement time, and movement trajectories were analyzed for the movement phase. A block-wise binomial logistic regression model was computed to analyze whether the social influence condition and the location of the emergency exit predicted the destination choice, although logistic regression implies a causal connection of dependent and independent variables and requires independent errors (which is violated in a repeated measures design). Participants had three destination choices: Moving to the emergency exit or moving along the tunnel either to their left or to their right (see Fig. 5). For the purpose of the analysis, destination choice was dichotomized into two categories (going to the emergency exit vs not going to the emergency exit). In total, there were 320 observations (4 × 2 different tunnel conditions for 40 participants). In 229 observations, participants went to the emergency exit and in 91 cases participants went to another destination. In the first block, exit-location added as a predictor for destination choice. Exit-location did not significantly improve the model in the first block, χ
                        2 (1) = 0.02, p = .90. In the second block, social influence conditions were added as a predictor which significantly improved the model, χ
                        2 (3) = 14.09, p < .01, indicating that the model could distinguish between participants who went to the emergency exit and those who did not (Fig. 4
                        ).

Odds ratios (OR) were calculated for each social influence condition compared to the control condition. OR reflect the ratio of the odds of reaching the emergency exit and the odds of not reaching the emergency exit for each social influence condition compared to the control condition. An OR greater than 1 indicates that reaching the emergency exit was more likely to occur in the social influence condition than in the control condition. An OR less than 1 indicates the inverse. ORs for participants to move to the emergency exit were 1.89 in trials in which the VA went to the exit, 0.53 in which the VA went away from the exit, and 0.60 if the VA was passive, compared to trials in which no VA was present (control condition). Participants were almost twice as likely to move to the emergency exit if a VA also went there, compared to conditions in which no VA was present. In contrast, participants were almost half as likely to move to the emergency exit, if the VA did not move there and .60 times less likely to do so, if the VA stayed passive. However, these results have to be interpreted with caution, since the within-subjects design leads to accumulated dependent errors.

A 4 × 2 repeated measures ANOVA with the factors social influence condition (4), location of emergency exit (2) and the dependent variable movement time was conducted. Movement time reflects the time for which the participants actually moved in each trial until they reached either the emergency exit or any other end of the tunnel scenario. There was a significant main effect of social influence condition on movement time, F(3, 304) = 8.09, p < .01, η
                        p
                        2 = .17, and a significant main effect of the exit-location on movement time, F(1, 304) = 8.15, p < .01, η
                        p
                        2 = .17. If the emergency exit was on the right relative to the starting-position, participants needed longer until they reached the exit. There was no interaction effect between social influence condition and exit-location on movement time, F(3, 304) = 2.04, p = .11. Planned contrast analysis revealed significant differences between the passive conflict condition and all other conditions. In this condition, participants needed longer to reach their destination than in any other condition (Fig. 3).

For each participant, movement-trajectories
                           1
                        
                        
                           1
                           Coordinates and time were extracted from the raw data using a script written with R 2.14 (R Core Team, 2013).
                         were calculated and plotted for each of the eight conditions (Fig. 6). Visual analysis of the movement-trajectories confirmed that most participants went to the emergency exit. However, it became clear that participants chose different paths to get there. Most participants moved more or less directly to the exit. Only few crossed the carriageway and then moved alongside the tunnel wall on the sidewalk. This effect is stronger in the two tunnel maps in the control condition. In the two maps in which the VA moved away from the exit, the movement-trajectories were more scattered. If the VA stayed passive, most participants moved to the location of the VA before moving on.

Since participants could move to different locations in the tunnel at the end of a trial, the effects of the independent variables may be confounded by the absolute distance between the starting- and end-position of each participant. In order to address this problem, the difference between the absolute trajectory length and the Euklidian distance between the starting and endposition of each participant was calculated. This dependent variable is referred to as the relative trajectory length (RTL). A 4 × 2 repeated measures ANOVA with the factors social influence condition (4), location of emergency exit (2), and the dependent variable RTL was carried out. There was a significant main effect of experimental condition on RTL, F(3, 304) = 4.01, p < .01, η
                        p
                        2 = .04, and a no main effect of the exit-location on movement time, F(1, 304) = 0.20, p < .65. If the emergency exit was on the right relative to the starting-position, participants needed longer until they reached the exit. There was no interaction effect between the social influence conditions and exit-location on movement time, F(3, 304) = 0.81, p = .49. Planned contrast analysis revealed significant differences between the passive conflict condition and all other conditions. RTL was longer in this condition than in any other condition confirming the results of visual analysis of the trajectories (Fig. 5
                        ).

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The present study systematically investigated social influence on evacuation behavior in a virtual tunnel fire. Four social influence conditions were realized and effects on the pre-movement and movement phases of an evacuation scenario were examined. In each scenario, participants were situated in a road tunnel filled with dark smoke. Through the smoke an emergency exit was visible either to the left or right from the participant's starting-position. A Virtual Agent (VA) was present in all social influence conditions, but not in the control condition. In the no-conflict condition, the VA moved directly to the emergency exit, while in the active conflict condition he moved in the opposite direction, away from the emergency exit. Finally, in the passive conflict condition, the VA simply stood a few meters away from the participant's starting-position and remained passive. The aim was to create experimental conditions in which the participants had to deal with emergency situations with or without conflicting information.

Social influence was found to affect the pre-movement phase, i.e., the time until the movement began. The passive conflict condition had a strong effect on the pre-movement time. If participants were confronted with a passive VA, they waited longer until they started to move. Interestingly, the active conflict condition had no effect on the pre-movement time. These findings corroborate classical studies on diffusion of responsibility, showing that passive bystanders inhibit evacuation (Latane and Darley, 1968). Nilsson and Johansson (2009) found in an cinema evacuation experiment that the pre-movement time was delayed if a fire alarm was an unspecific alarm bell compared to specific voice alarms instructing participants to evacuate. Similarly, in the present study the passive VA agent may have induced a feeling of ambiguity. The results indicate that the passivity of other occupants is a special risk factor during tunnel evacuation.

There were significant interaction effects between the location of the emergency exit and social influence conditions on the pre-movement time. The effect of the passive agent was only found if the emergency exit was on the right of the starting-position. This is surprising since apart from the location of the starting-position relative to the emergency exit, the left and right emergency exit location conditions were identical. A possible explanation could be a general turning bias toward the left. Similar to the present study, a VR study on signage found a tendency of participants to turn left at T-intersections in a simulated building corridor (Tang et al., 2009). However, the findings on such biases are still under debate (Yuan et al., 2014). The more likely explanation could be an effect of the trial order. In both trial order conditions, the right emergency exit location preceded the left exit location. In trial order A, the left passive conflict condition came immediately after the right passive conflict condition (see Table 2). There might be a learning effect as participants may have simply learnt that the passive VA stayed inactive throughout the whole trial.

Social influence effects were also found in the movement phase of the experiment. This was reflected in destination choice, movement time, and movement trajectories. Across all conditions, around 60% of the participants moved to the emergency exit. This is consistent with previous studies documenting similar evacuation rates in comparable scenarios (Kobes et al., 2010a,b). However, destination choice was affected by social influence. If no VA was present, 75% of the participants went to the emergency exit. This number increased to 85% if the VA also went to the emergency exit, but decreased to 61% if the VA went away from the exit (active conflict). Please note that even in the “ideal” no conflict condition, in which all possible sources of information directed participants toward the emergency exit, 15% of the participants decided to move into the dark smoke. In the active conflict condition this number even increased to 40%. If the VA stayed passive (passive conflict), 65% of the participants reached the exit. The movement-trajectories indicated that many participants first went to the passive VA presumably to gather more information. On the one hand, these results are alarming, since in a real world tunnel fire delayed evacuation would be potentially life threatening. On the other hand, it is promising to note that throughout all conditions, most participants moved to the emergency exit. This indicates that the emergency exit was recognized as a place of safety during the tunnel emergency. Overall, these findings confirm observations from a real tunnel fire in which observers noted that occupants followed others (Burns et al., 2013).

Given that participants did not enter the tunnel themselves but were “teleported” into the scenario, we assume that the proportion of participants who did not move to the emergency exit is somewhat underestimated in the present study. Previous studies and analysis of real tunnel emergencies document that not all tunnel occupants leave their vehicle to evacuate. Occupants frequently show an evacuation behavior termed “movement towards the familiar”, and hence often remain in their vehicle or move toward the portal from where they entered the tunnel (Frantzich and Nilsson, 2004; Mc Clintock et al., 2001). In the present study, none of the participants entered any of the vehicles in the tunnel, although they had practiced entering vehicles during the initial training phase prior to the actual experiment. This is particularly interesting, since such behavior was observed during real tunnel fires (Shields, 2012). Considering Sime's (1985) theory on movement to the familiar, one may speculate that our participants were not familiar enough with entering a virtual car in the context of the experiment and, therefore, the present experiment might underestimate the number of tunnel occupants who in real tunnel fires do not use the emergency exit.

Social influence not only affected destination choice but also movement time, RTL, and the participants' movement trajectories to the emergency exit (Figs. 3, 5 and 6
                        ). The majority of participants opted for the shortest route, and only a small number crossed the carriageway to the sidewalk and then went to the exit. On the one hand, the first option may have been slightly faster. On the other hand, the sidewalk is the safer route, since there is less risk of traffic and the tunnel wall facilitates orientation in case of reduced visibility. Especially in the passive conflict condition, several participants moved to the VA and tried to interact with him. This behavior caused prolonged movement times and RTLs in this condition and could be interpreted as a tend or befriend reaction in response to stress (von Dawans et al., 2012).

Another noteworthy point is the high within-group variance of RTL (Fig. 5). We found a relatively high number of outliers in each experimental condition. Together with the descriptive analysis of the movement-trajectories, this indicates that evacuation behavior is highly complex and there seems to be a high inter-individual variance which is still not sufficiently understood. Future studies should aim to get a better understanding of movement-trajectories during tunnel evacuation. This is especially relevant since evacuation models often rely on relatively simple assumptions about occupant movement (Kuligowski and Peacock, 2005; Ronchi and Kinsey, 2011).

How should the results be interpreted in terms of ergonomic aspects of tunnel evacuation? We assume that social influence increases or decreases the ambiguity of an emergency situation and as a consequence modulates behavior regarding destination choice, route choice, as well as pre-movement and movement times. If the behavior of the VA contradicted the information provided by the safety installations (emergency exit and signage), adequate safety behavior became less likely and/or began later. If social influence was congruent with the safety installation, adequate behavior was more likely and/or faster. As the majority of the participants moved to the emergency exit (green light, illuminated door frame), it is possible that most participants associated the exit with safety. Future studies should further investigate this question as studies suggest that inter-individual differences (e.g., literacy, age, cultural back ground) may influence the interpretation of safety relevant signage (Hashim et al., 2014). Another interesting question is the effect of emergency signage on destination choice. Most participants, who went toward the backlit emergency signage (see Fig. 6), ultimately went to the emergency exit. These findings are in line with other works indicating that cued and dynamic signage may foster adequate egress decisions (Duarte et al., 2014).

The results of the present study have more general implications for measures aiming to improve evacuation behavior. First, training measures improving self-evacuation are likely to have a positive effect not only on the trained persons, but also on people in their environment in case of an emergency. One may speculate that training selected groups, e.g., truck drivers or dangerous goods transporters, could multiply the effect of training during emergencies because of social influence. Second, since social influence might affect the ambiguity of an emergency situation, safety instructions and signage need to be as unambiguous as possible. One study showed that fewer decision elements in the environment and less ambiguity, led to improved self-evacuation (Heskestad, 1999). Third, the research on the design of evacuation routes from road tunnels need to take these considerations into account. Emergency exits and signage need to be clearly visible and provide unambiguous credible information (Kuligowski, 2013). Finally, as sidewalks seem to be used by occupants to reach exits, these should be accessible for all occupants (including mobility impaired occupants).

VR is a relatively new method in evacuation research. Therefore, strengths and limitations of this method need to be addressed. Please note that the results of the present study should be interpreted in a relative manner and not as absolute values as the main goal was to investigate general underlying mechanisms of social influence in tunnel emergencies. In other fields of experimental psychology (e.g., research on post-traumatic stress disorder), VR has become a well-established method as it has a number of benefits. VR studies are safe, cost effective, easy to replicate, and allow a maximum of control over the presented scenarios (Wiederhold and Wiederhold, 2010).

VR allows creating complex emergency scenarios with full experimental control in the safe environment of a laboratory (Boyle and Lee, 2010). Other methods for studying human behavior in tunnel emergencies include observations from drills or real events (e.g., Shields, 2012), field studies (e.g., Frantzich and Nilsson, 2004; Fridolf et al., 2013a,b), classical laboratory studies (Latane and Darley, 1968), questionnaire studies (e.g., Gandit et al., 2009), as well as hypothetical scenarios (e.g., Lawson et al., 2013). These methods tradeoff between external validity and experimental control. Data from real events and drills will always be specific for the case studied and have no experimental control, making causal interpretations about behavioral measures problematic. Classical laboratory studies need to simplify emergency scenarios to achieve experimental control. VR allows the simulation of complex scenarios such as tunnel emergencies with high experimental control (Boyle and Lee, 2010). It has been shown that results from VR and real world evacuation studies are comparable (Kobes et al., 2010a,b). A comparison of VR studies and other methods such as evacuation simulations permits the identification of potential limitations of these methods and future research questions.

Indicators of the validity of a virtual environment are adequate emotional responses to the simulation. In the present study, participants reported increased state anxiety after the experiment, indicating that the simulated tunnel emergency elicited an adequate emotional reaction to some extent. In line with this, previous studies have demonstrated that virtual tunnel simulations can induce fear reactions in tunnel phobic patients (Mühlberger et al., 2007). In the same vein, driving simulator studies demonstrated that drivers inside of virtual road tunnel drove more carefully and experienced more anxiety than on open roads (Calvi, 2010; Calvi and De Blasiis, 2011).

@&#LIMITATIONS@&#

There are several limitations of the present study that need to be addressed. First, only one VA was present during each trial. In a real world tunnel emergency, or any other dangerous situation, it is likely that more people are present, and groups of people may exert stronger social influence or give even more ambiguous and conflicting information. Second, participants had no possibility to interact with the VA. In the passive conflict condition, it is highly likely that participants intended to interact with the VA. Third, only the social influence of a male VA was tested in this study, although gender effects are well documented during evacuation. For example, in one study women were more likely to evacuate than men in a simulated tunnel accident (Kinateder et al., 2013). In addition, a cross-sectional survey study found that women are also more likely to evacuate during natural catastrophes. The authors of this study assume that the observed gender differences may be related to gender specific social norms, gender differences regarding actual and perceived exposure to risk, as well as gender specific incentives to evacuate (Bateman and Edwards, 2002). Further studies should take into account possible differential effects of gender, social roles, and individual personality traits. Fourth, we have to consider the so-called uncanny valley hypothesis claiming that almost perfectly humanlike VAs elicit negative emotional reactions in human observers (MacDorman et al., 2009; Mori, 1970). If the VA of this study “fell” into the uncanny valley, it is likely that its social influence effects were reduced, meaning that the observed social influence effects are an underestimation of the actual social influence effects. Fifth, the present study realized an almost complete within-subjects design, and although we checked for effects of trial order (e.g., learning effects), these cannot be completely ruled out. We chose the within-subject design due to its economical increase in statistical power. Further studies should consider replicating these findings in a complete between-subjects design. Sixth, the sample consisted mainly of psychology students. That is, the participants were younger and a more homogenous sample than the general population. Future studies are necessary to study social influence during tunnel evacuation with a larger and more representative sample. Seventh, due to technical reasons the movement speed was fixed and set at a slow running speed (2.86 m/s). In a recent study an average movement speed of 0.9 m/s (range 0.42–1.82 m/s) was found in a smoke filled tunnel (Fridolf et al., 2013a,b). However, the visibility conditions in the study of Fridolf et al. (2013a,b) were much lower (0.40–2.50 m) than in the present study (8–15 m), and other studies indicate a linear relationship between visibility conditions and movement speed through smoke (e.g., Jin, 2008). Movement speeds during building and tunnel evacuation with various degrees of visibility have been reported within the range of approximately 0.5–1.7 m/s (e.g., Fridolf et al., 2013a,b; Peacock et al., 2012). Consequently, one may argue that the movement speed in the present study was possibly too high. That is, absolute values of movement times are not directly comparable to real road tunnels and the results have to be interpreted in a relative manner. Future VR studies, especially those using low visibility conditions, should consider implementing more realistic and, if possible, flexible movement speeds. However, these might be problematic since the perception of walking speed is not necessarily the same as in the real world (Banton et al., 2005). Eighth, although the rendering of the simulated smoke was created on a scientific basis (Ingason, 2012), it was not numerically calculated or physically simulated, thereby, limiting the realism of the simulation. Ninth, the trial order was not completely randomized, which may explain the interaction-effect between emergency exit location and social influence condition on pre-movement time. In the same vein, due to the randomization results, the active conflict condition always preceded the passive conflict condition in both trial orders. Future studies should completely randomize the trial order for each participant.

In conclusion, this study demonstrated clear social influence effects on evacuation behavior during tunnel fires, and that social influence may have both positive and negative effects. Increase or decrease of ambiguity about the optimal escape route due to social influence can increase or decrease the frequency of wrong decisions and/or of pre-movement times, respectively, and, hence, can modulate the likelihood of adequate safety behavior. We observed that only about 60% of the participants reacted adequately in a tunnel fire situation and moved toward the next emergency exit independent of social influence. Furthermore, it is alarming to note that even if emergency exits are clearly visible and other people also move there, some individuals still decide to move into the smoke.

Prof. Paul Pauli and Prof. Andreas Mühlberger are shareholders of a commercial company that develops virtual environment research systems for empirical studies in the field of psychology, psychiatry, and psychotherapy. Mathias Müller is executive officer of the same company. No further potential conflicting interests exist.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

The authors would like to thank the SKRIBTPlus consortium as well as Lea Ahrens, Dominika Wilisz, Fridolin Kielisch, and Stefanie Löw for supporting the data collection and analysis.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

