@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#The influence of occupation and age on maximal and rapid lower extremity strength

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We examined age-related maximal and rapid strength capacities in workers.


                        
                        
                           
                           Physical workload was quantified and examined in relation to strength capacities.


                        
                        
                           
                           Occupation did not influence the age-related decline in any strength variables.


                        
                        
                           
                           A negative correlation was shown between workload and rapid strength in older men.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Rate of force development

Blue collar

Aging

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


                  The aims of this study were to 1) examine the influence of age and occupation on maximal and rapid strength of the lower-extremity muscles and 2) examine the relationship between maximal and rapid strength and physical workload (work index (WI)) in the blue-collar (BC) cohort. Peak torque (PT) and peak rate of torque development (peakRTD) of the leg extensors (LE), leg flexors (LF), and plantar flexors (PF) were assessed in 47 young (age = 24.1 ± 2.4 years) and 41 middle-aged (52.4 ± 5.2 years) white-collar (WC) and BC men. Middle-aged workers exhibited lower PT for all muscles, and peakRTD for the LF and PF muscles. A positive relationship (r = 0.59; P < 0.01) was observed between WI and peakRTD for the PF in the young BC workers, however, this relationship was negative (r = −0.45; P = 0.053) for the LF of the middle-aged BC workers. Lowering physical work demands and/or incorporating effective health-related practices for employees may be appealing strategies to enhance aging workers' productivity and longevity in the workforce.
               

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

The rapidly rising age of the labor force has resulted in the number of workers aged 55 and older to double between 1990 and 2010, with projections of a further 38% increase by 2020 when this population will comprise 25% of the total labor force (Toossi, 2012). Despite recent technological advances and automated labor, workers categorized in blue collar occupations still comprise over 60% of the labor force (Workers by occupational category, 2012). In addition, the physical work demands of these workers may not decline with age (Ilmarinen, 2002), but may actually increase, as reported by Nygard et al. (1997) who examined physical work demands over an 11-year period in older workers. Moreover, research suggests that those involved in physically demanding work are predisposed to early retirement (Yeatts et al., 2000). Thus, a better knowledge of the influence of physical work demands on various physiological systems (e.g. neuromuscular function) will be important to help maximize the productivity and longevity of the aging manual laborer.

It is known that neuromuscular function progressively declines with advancing age (Clark and Manini, 2008) and adequate neuromuscular functioning is required for optimal occupational-related performance (de Zwart et al., 1995). Previous authors have also indicated that occupational demands may also have a significant influence on neuromuscular function. For example, studies examining the shoulder and wrist flexor muscles (Schibye et al., 2001; Tammelin et al., 2002; Torgen et al., 1999) have reported that workers in blue collar (BC) occupations exhibited greater muscular strength when compared to those in white collar (WC) occupations, while more studies have suggested either no differences for trunk and wrist flexor muscles (Nygard et al., 1987a, 1988, 1991a) or lower muscular strength for the wrist flexor, trunk, and leg extensor muscles (Nygard et al., 1987a, 1991a; Era et al., 1992; Heikkinen et al., 1984) for BC versus WC workers. Moreover, the interaction of the workers' age and occupational category further complicates the ability to elucidate the influence of occupational demands on the decline of overall physical function in the aging worker. Mixed findings have also been reported for the effects of aging in workers of different occupational categories. For instance, Schibye et al. (2001) demonstrated greater muscular strength in the shoulder muscles of BC workers (waste collection) when compared to WC controls, however, in contrast, both Heikkinen et al. (1984) and Era et al. (1992) reported lower strength in older BC workers compared to WC controls. Although discrepancies among these studies may be due to different strength testing methodologies, muscle groups, and age groups, little is presently known regarding the influence of physically strenuous work on neuromuscular function across the lifespan. A useful approach for enhanced clarification of such issues, would be to examine the relationships between occupational physical workload levels and muscle function at different stages in the working lifespan.

Although work-related neuromuscular function is most commonly assessed using maximal strength capacities, the ability to produce strength rapidly is often considered a more functionally relevant expression of strength (i.e. explosive or rapid strength) (Thompson et al., 2013a). Previous studies (Bento et al., 2010; Thompson et al., 2013b) have shown that the ability to rapidly produce torque is associated with athletic status and risk of falls, and thus may provide more sensitive physiological information regarding one's neuromuscular capacities compared to maximal strength alone. However, we are aware of no studies that have examined these variables among workers of different occupational categories. Furthermore, the majority of studies examining neuromuscular function in workers have focused on muscles of the upper body (i.e. trunk, shoulder, wrist muscles). However, the lower body musculature provides the primary means of locomotion, and the base of support for manual materials handling, with work abilities and injury risks being inherently linked to a workers' ability to move their body rapidly and efficiently. For instance, the most preventable fatal occupational-related events include contact with objects, and falls (Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2013). It is possible that the inability to rapidly produce torque may increase the likelihood of sustaining these injuries. Therefore, the purpose of the present study was to examine the influence of age and occupational category on maximal and rapid strength capacities in young and middle-aged BC and WC workers, with a secondary aim to investigate the relationship between physical workload and maximal and rapid strength in the BC cohort. In light of previous literature, it was hypothesized that BC workers would exhibit similar age-related declines in strength capacities compared to WC workers, and that higher workload would be related to lower strength-related performance in BC workers.

@&#METHODS@&#

Twenty-two young WC (mean ± SD: age = 25.0 ± 2.9, stature = 177.4 ± 7.1, mass = 84.7 ± 11.7), twenty-five young BC (age = 23.1 ± 1.8, stature = 174.9 ± 6.1, mass = 87.5 ± 21.4), twenty-two middle-aged WC (age = 51.8 ± 5.0, stature = 181.0 ± 7.4, mass = 98.6 ± 17.3) and nineteen middle-aged BC (age = 53.0 ± 5.4, stature = 175.8 ± 7.9, mass 97.3 ± 15.6) working men volunteered to participate in the study. The participants were recruited from communities near the University by advertisement flyers, direct mailings, telephone and in person contact. This study was approved by the University Institutional Review Board and all participants completed and signed an informed consent document and health history questionnaire. The health history questionnaire was used to screen participants for study participation. Participants were required to be apparently healthy, with no contraindications to physical exercise. None of the participants reported having a myocardial infarction event nor any current or ongoing neuromuscular diseases or musculoskeletal injuries of the ankle, knee, or hip of their right leg within 1 year prior to testing.

Participants visited the laboratory on three separate occasions with the first session being a familiarization trial where the participants completed a health history and modified Baecke questionnaire, had all anthropometric measurements recorded, and then performed a minimum of three practice isometric maximal voluntary contractions (MVCs) for the plantar flexors (PF), leg extensors (LE), and leg flexors (LF). Within two–four days following the familiarization trial, participants reported back to the laboratory for the first experimental trial which involved isometric strength testing of the PF, followed by the isometric strength assessments of both the LE and LF muscle groups four–seven days later with all testing conducted at the same time of day (±2 h).

Occupational information including work history (duration at the specified occupation), employment status (full or part time), and job description (type of tasks performed at work) were collected via questionnaire and interview format during the familiarization trial. Each participant's occupation was defined as the primary job that they performed the longest throughout the duration of their occupational or active life (Russo et al., 2006) for a minimum of 30 h per week. Participants were classified according to their occupation using a two category job classification system, where workers are grouped into broad categories based on similar types of occupations, in accordance with the procedures of previous studies (Russo et al., 2006; Almoosawi et al., 2012). The two categories consisted of either WC- or BC-related occupations. Specifically, WC workers included occupations categorized as managers, administrators, scientific or research professionals (i.e., professors, technicians, intellectuals), clerical employees, full-time students, and market or sales workers. BC workers included occupations categorized as skilled workers in agricultural, manufacturing, or construction industries, machine installers or operators, assemblers, mechanics, grounds crew and unskilled laborers. Participants were further categorized by age as being either young (19–29 years) or middle-aged (45–61 years). In addition, the young and middle-aged BC groups completed a series of occupational- and leisure-related questions from the modified Baecke physical activity questionnaire (Pols et al., 1995) (appendix questions 2–8 and 11–20, respectively) to determine their self-reported work index (WI) and leisure index (LI) scores.

The MVC testing procedures have been described previously (Thompson et al., 2013a). Briefly, the MVCs were performed with the right leg using a calibrated Biodex System 4 isokinetic dynamometer (Biodex Medical Systems, Inc. Shirley, NY, USA). For all strength assessments, participants were seated with restraining straps placed over the trunk, pelvis, and thigh and the lever arm of the dynamometer was strapped to the lower leg via either a padded velcro strap at a level of 5 cm proximal to the lateral malleolus (LE and LF testing), or the foot was secured to a footplate with a thick rubber heel cup with straps placed over the toes and metatarsals (PF testing). The input axis of the dynamometer was aligned with the axis of rotation of the knee and ankle joints. All PF MVCs were performed at a neutral joint angle (90° between the leg and the foot) and at a leg angle of 60° below the horizontal plane for the LE and LF muscle actions (Thompson et al., 2013b). Prior to the maximal strength testing, participants performed a 5 min warm-up on a cycle ergometer (Monark Exercise 828E, Vansbro, Sweden) at a self-selected low-intensity workload. Following the warm-up, participants performed two-three MVCs for all muscle actions with the MVC testing of the LE and LF muscle actions being randomly ordered. One minute of recovery was provided between each MVC and 3 min between muscle groups. During all MVC measurements the participants were verbally instructed to “pull” or “push” down or up on the lever arm without any prior movement. They were specifically instructed to perform the MVC “as hard and fast as possible” for a total of 4 s (Thompson et al., 2013a).

The torque signal was sampled from the isokinetic dynamometer at 2 kHz with a Biopac data acquisition system (MP150WSW, Biopac Systems, Inc.; Santa Barbara, CA, USA), stored on a personal computer (Dell OptiPlex, GX270, Dell Inc., Round Rock, TX, USA), and processed off-line with custom written software (Labview 8.5, National Instruments, Austin, TX, USA). The scaled torque signal (Newton-meters, Nm) was filtered using a fourth order, zero phase shift low pass Butterworth filter with a 10 Hz cutoff frequency. The passive baseline torque value was considered the limb weight and subtracted from the signal so that the new baseline value was set at 0 Nm. All subsequent analyses were performed on the scaled, filtered, and gravity-corrected torque signal.

MVCs exhibiting a visible countermovement were discarded from further analyses. MVC PT was determined as the highest 0.5 s epoch during the entire 4 s MVC. The first derivative of the torque signal was calculated from which peakRTD was determined as the peak of the signal during the initial ascent of the torque–time curve. In addition to the absolute values, all PT and peakRTD variables were divided by the participants' body mass in order to provide a body mass normalized expression of maximal and rapid torque capacities (Aagaard et al., 2007; LaRoche et al., 2010; Laroche et al., 2007).

Multiple one-way analyses of variance (ANOVAs) were used to compare the means of the stature, body mass, LI, and length of employment variables between the four groups. Twelve separate two-way between subjects factorial ANOVAs (age [young vs middle-aged] × occupation [WC vs BC]) were used to examine the absolute and normalized PT and peakRTD variables for each muscle. When appropriate, follow up analyses included Bonferroni post-hoc comparisons. Two-way Pearson product–moment correlation coefficients (r) were used to evaluate the relationships between the strength-related variables (PT and peakRTD) and WI in the BC men. PASW software version 20.0 (SPSS, Inc., Chicago, IL, USA) was used for all statistical analyses and an alpha value of P ≤ 0.05 was considered statistically significant for all comparisons.

@&#RESULTS@&#

The demographic analyses showed the middle-aged WC were taller than the young BC men (P = 0.020), however, no other differences in stature were present between groups. Also, the middle-aged WC were heavier than the young WC men (P = 0.042), however, no other body mass differences were present between groups (P = 0.096–0.995). There were no differences (P = 0.087) in the LI scores between any of the young and middle-aged, WC and BC groups (LI scores: 2.61 ± 0.48, 2.76 ± 0.57, 3.00 ± 0.49 and 2.77 ± 0.46, respectively). The length of employment of the workers' primary job was greater for the middle-aged workers (P < 0.01) compared to the young workers, however, no differences (P = 1.00) were found for either the young or middle-aged workers between occupational categories (years of employment: 3.9 ± 2.4, 2.8 ± 2.4, 23.1 ± 10.4, 25.1 ± 11.9 for young WC and BC and middle-aged WC and BC workers, respectively).

The absolute PT and peakRTD variables for the PF, LE, and LF muscles for all groups are presented in Table 1
                     , whereas the body mass normalized values are presented in Fig. 1
                     . Additionally, the correlation coefficients for the PT and RTD variables and work index are presented in Table 2
                     .

There were no age × occupation interactions observed for any of the strength-related variables (P = 0.428–0.869). There were also no main effects for occupation (P = 0.317–0.984). However, main effects were observed for age group. For both absolute and normalized PT, the middle-aged were lower when compared to the young men for all muscles (P < 0.01). For peakRTD, there were no age-related differences for the LE for the absolute (P = 0.834) and normalized (P = 0.066) values nor for the LF for the absolute (P = 0.150). However, the middle-aged showed lower peakRTD compared to the young men for the PF for the absolute (P = 0.041) and normalized (P < 0.01) values and the LF for the normalized vales (P < 0.01) (Fig. 1).

There was a positive relationship between WI and normalized peakRTD for the PF muscles (P = 0.002) in the young BC men and a non-significant (P = 0.053) negative relationship between the LF peakRTD and WI in the middle-aged BC men (Fig. 2
                     ). No other significant relationships were observed for either the young (P = 0.075–0.387) or middle-aged BC men (P = 0.303–0.998).

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The primary findings of the present investigation were that no differences existed between age-matched occupational categories (WC vs. BC) for both maximal and rapid strength characteristics, and that these strength variables were reduced in the middle-aged men when compared to the young men. Specifically, PT was lower in the middle-aged men for all muscles and peakRTD was lower for the LF and PF, but not for the LE muscles. Interestingly, there was a positive relationship between the WI and PF peakRTD for the young BC men, but a negative relationship between the WI and LF peakRTD in the middle-aged BC men. Thus, our hypothesis was supported regarding similar age-related declines in muscle function between occupational groups and the negative relationship observed between the WI and peakRTD in middle-aged BC men; however the positive relationship between WI and peakRTD in the young men and the lack of relationships for the maximal strength variables were not supportive of our hypothesis.

An age-related reduction in body mass normalized maximal strength was observed independent of occupational category with PT being 22.5–26.1% lower in both middle-aged groups when compared to the younger groups for the LE, LF and PF muscles. The age-related reduction in leg extension PT (23.7%) between young and middle-aged workers are in agreement with the findings of Heikkinen et al. (1984) who reported that middle-aged male workers had 22% lower body mass normalized peak force compared to the young male workers in their study. However, the influence of age on rapid torque capacities was muscle group specific. Although there were no occupational or age-related differences in peakRTD for the LE, normalized peakRTD was lower in the middle-aged men when compared to the young men for the LF (21.1% lower) and PF (22.4% lower) muscles. These findings are in agreement with Runnels et al. (2005) and Thompson et al. (2013a) who reported no age-related declines in peakRFD or peakRTD for the LE for middle-aged men when compared to young men. However, the reduction in normalized LF peakRTD is in contrast with previous studies (Thompson et al., 2013a; Runnels et al., 2005) which have demonstrated no differences in LF peakRTD/RFD between middle-aged and young men. These discrepancies are likely due to differences between the previously reported absolute peakRFD, versus the body mass normalized peakRFD measures used in the present study, which may reflect reduced relative strength resulting in part from increases in body mass in middle-aged subjects. In addition, changes in non-occupational physical activities may contribute to disparities on the performance declines between age groups. Although in the present study no differences were observed between groups for leisure time activity levels, it is possible that non-occupational related activities may change with aging and vary between WC and BC groups. Future research is needed to address these issues.

An important occupational-related finding was the similar age-related reductions in maximal and rapid muscle strength for both the WC and BC men. These findings are in agreement with a number of previous studies reporting no occupational-related differences in maximal muscle strength of middle-aged workers who are engaged in physically heavy and light occupations (Nygard et al., 1987b, 1988, 1991b; Era et al., 1992). However, in contrast, other studies have reported that middle-aged workers engaged in heavy physically demanding occupations have exhibited both superior (Schibye et al., 2001; Torgen et al., 1999) and inferior (Era et al., 1992; Heikkinen et al., 1984; Nygard et al., 1987b, 1991b) maximal strength capacities when compared to workers engaged in lighter, less demanding occupations. The discrepancies among these studies may be attributed to differences in the testing procedures, job tasks, age-ranges and/or muscle groups examined (Schibye et al., 2001; Nygard et al., 1988; Era et al., 1992; Heikkinen et al., 1984). For example, several previous studies examining the effects of occupational category on maximal isometric muscle strength have measured a number of different muscle groups, which have included the wrist flexors (i.e. handgrip), shoulder flexors/abductors, leg extensors, and trunk flexors and extensors. The large variety of muscles examined across these studies may explain some of these inconsistent findings. For instance, previous authors (Schibye et al., 2001; Torgen et al., 1999) have suggested that physically heavy work may have a varying impact on specific body regions such that a training effect (i.e. greater preservation or enhanced muscle strength) may be observed for the upper body (specifically the hand, arm and shoulder muscles), whereas the lower extremities may be more vulnerable to physical work-related “wearing” or at least a lack of training effect. However, few studies have examined the effects of occupational workload on muscle strength for the muscles of the lower body, with a particular paucity of literature examining workers' maximal strength characteristics for either the LF or PF muscle groups and rapid strength characteristics. Thus, these findings may provide a useful contribution toward a gap in the “aging worker” literature. Altogether, these findings suggest that in addition to maximal strength, the ability to develop strength rapidly is diminished in middle-aged male workers compared to younger workers, and that these effects are independent of occupational category, which may imply that heavy physical work elicits no preservation or training effect on maximal and rapid strength in lower extremity muscles (specifically the LF and PF).

A key finding of the present study was the positive relationship (r = 0.588; P = 0.002) between the self-reported WI and rapid strength (peakRTD) in the PF muscles in young BC workers and the negative relationship (r = –0.451; P = 0.053) between WI and the LF muscles' rapid strength in the middle-aged BC workers. These findings highlight the different effects observed regarding heavy physical work on neuromuscular function for young compared to middle-aged BC workers. Previous authors (Schibye et al., 2001; Torgen et al., 1999; Nygard et al., 1987b, 1994; Keyserling et al., 1980a) have suggested that heavy physical work may result in a “wearing” effect across a workers' lifespan which would likely be manifested in diminished muscle function capacities. However, these interpretations are often made between BC and WC populations and not between BC cohorts. These findings are in line with the suggestions of previous authors (Tammelin et al., 2002; Torgen et al., 1999; Nygard et al., 1987a) who have proposed that a training effect may be observed with heavy physical labor in young workers, however, this effect is likely diminished, negated, or even reversed as the worker approaches middle-age. The negative relationship observed in the middle-aged BC workers may be a consequence of strenuous physical work factors possibly leading to increased musculoskeletal disorders, and/or chronic fatigue resulting from repeated physical exposure, high static work conditions, inadequate recovery periods, and the nature of the frequency, intensity, movements, and postures of the occupational-related physical loading patterns (Tammelin et al., 2002; Torgen et al., 1999; Nygard et al., 1987b, 1988, 1991b, 1994; Ruzic et al., 2003; Leino-Arjas et al., 2004). For example, it has been suggested that strenuous physical work is unsuitable for eliciting positive training adaptations in older workers due to the reduced ability to recover from the accumulated effects of consecutive work days over long periods, and/or the intensity, duration, and volume of physical work is not a favorable exercise stimulus to elicit positive muscular adaptations (Tammelin et al., 2002; Ruzic et al., 2003). Furthermore, it is noteworthy that only the rapid strength (peakRTD) but not the maximal strength (PT) characteristics were related to WI. The greater sensitivity of rapid strength in comparison to maximal strength capacities has been acknowledged previously (Thompson et al., 2013b; Palmer et al., 2014), and may be an important factor for many job related tasks (i.e. rapid body re-positioning during difficult/dangerous tasks, balancing with- and lifting heavy objects rapidly etc.) (Thompson et al., 2013b; Jakobsen et al., 2011; Stone et al., 2003), and the prevention of many common job-related injuries (i.e. falls, musculoskeletal injuries etc.) (Keyserling et al., 1980a,b; Chaffin et al., 1978; Shishlov et al., 2011). Thus, future investigations examining occupational category and physical capacities in workers may consider integrating more rapid-based performance assessments.

Previous authors (Aagaard et al., 2007; LaRoche et al., 2010; Laroche et al., 2007) have expressed maximal and rapid torque variables relative to body mass, in order to account for differences in body size. Moreover, because dynamic functional tasks involve the movement (i.e. acceleration, deceleration, and support) of ones' body mass (Nuzzo et al., 2008), it has been previously suggested by Laroche et al. (2007) that body mass normalized muscle function variables be used to “more accurately reflect the muscles' functional performance relative to the individuals mass” (p. 1661). Thus, it is of importance to note that the age-related effects on peakRTD for the LF and PF muscles in the present study were a function of both the declines in peakRTD which occurred in conjunction with a 13.8% increase (14.1 and 10.1% for WC and BC men, respectively) in body mass for the middle-aged men. From a functional standpoint, the deleterious effects of aging on functional muscle performance for both WC and BC workers are likely a consequence of multiple factors, which constitute not only neuromuscular performance declines but also include alterations in anthropometric characteristics across the occupational lifespan. This has been acknowledged by Laroche et al. (2007) who suggested that the increases in age-related body or fat mass may “mask” the decline in muscle function, as a consequence of the larger load placed on the loco-motor musculature. Accordingly, solutions aimed at preventing physical performance declines of the aging worker may be regarded from a multi-factorial perspective, which collectively incorporate efforts to enhance neuromuscular performance (i.e., strength, explosive strength, balance etc.) capacities, in addition to employing weight management interventions for the prevention of weight gain.

There are several limitations that should be discussed. First, it is possible that the categorization of workers into two broad occupational groups may have introduced some misclassification bias (i.e., levels of physical workload across various occupations may exhibit greater variation in one or the other groups). Also, the cross-sectional design of this study limits any causality between chronic work exposure and changes in neuromuscular function. It is not possible to rule out the presence of a ‘healthy worker’ effect on these results, which suggests the self-selection of workers exhibiting higher physical capacities into more physically demanding jobs while less fit or sickly persons may gravitate into lighter work (Tammelin et al., 2002). Finally, the present sample included male workers from a rural town in Oklahoma which may limit the applicability of our findings to other working populations.

In summary, the present results demonstrated that middle-aged WC and BC workers experience similar reductions in both maximal and rapid strength when compared to their younger counterparts. In the BC cohort, it was shown that higher levels of physically strenuous work were associated with higher rapid strength capacities for the young workers, whereas more strenuous work was associated with lower rapid strength capacities in the middle-aged workers. Given the age-related changes in neuromuscular function and the negative influence of a high occupational physical demand on rapid muscle strength in middle-aged BC workers, a prudent recommendation may be to collectively lower the physical work demands for older BC workers and/or incorporate interventions aimed at improving health and performance.

The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

