@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Multifractality in heartbeat dynamics in patients undergoing beating-heart myocardial revascularization

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Multifractality of heartbeat dynamics was evaluated before and after off-pump CABG.


                        
                        
                           
                           A decay of multifractal complexity into monofractal is observed after off-pump CABG.


                        
                        
                           
                           Circadian pattern of multifractality is partially regained after off-pump CABG.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Heart rate variability

Autonomic nervous system

Off-pump CABG

Circadian rhythm

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


                  Background
                  The multifractal approach of HRV analysis offers new insight into the mechanisms of autonomic modulation of the diseased hearts and has a potential to depict subtle changes in cardiac autonomic nervous control not revealed by conventional linear and non-linear analyses in various conditions like heart failure or stable angina pectoris. The aim of this study was to employ the multifractality approach in cardiac surgery patients and evaluate the multifractality before and after beating-heart myocardial revascularization (off-pump CABG).
               
                  Methods
                  Twenty-four hour Holter recordings were performed pre- and postoperatively in 60 patients undergoing off-pump CABG. Selected conventional time- and frequency-domain linear HRV indices were calculated from the 24h and 5min ECG segments, and preselected multifractal parameters τ(q=2), τ(q=3), h_top and Δh were determined for daytime (12:00–18:00) and nighttime (00:00–06:00) periods of the ECG recordings using Ivanov׳s method. Mean differences over time were tested using paired-samples t-test and exact Wilcoxon matched-pairs test. The results are reported as mean±SD and median with interquartile range. A p value of <0.05 was considered statistically significant.
               
                  Results
                  All selected conventional linear HRV parameters decreased significantly after off pump CABG (p from <0.001–0.015). Preoperatively, multifractal parameter τ(q=2) was −0.60±0.12 and −0.54±0.12, τ(q=3) −0.52±0.18 and −0.49±0.17, h_top 0.20±0.07 and 0.15±0.07 and Δh 0.31±0.14 and 0.17±0.14 for daytime and nighttime periods, respectively. Postoperatively, τ(q=2) and τ(q=3) were significantly higher for daytime (−0.49±0.15, p<0.001 and −0.43±0.23, p=0.015), whereas h_top and Δh were significanly higher for both daytime and nighttime (0.25±0.07, p<0.001 and 0.19±0.06, p=0.002 for h_top and 0.41±0.20, p=0.003 and 0.31±0.19, p<0.001 for Δh, respectively). All pre- and postoperative parameters, except τ(q=2) and τ(q=3) preoperatively, were significantly lower for nighttime as compared to daytime periods.
               
                  Conclusions
                  A significant breakdown of multifractal complexity and anti-correlation behavior with a significant sympathetic overdrive and a concomitant parasympathetic withdrawal occurs after off-pump CABG. The circadian pattern of multifractality regains its day–night variation in the first week after the surgical procedure.
               

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Heart rate variability (HRV) has been conventionally determined with linear time- and frequency-domain analyses, using spectral and statistical techniques to measure the overall magnitude of R–R interval fluctuations around its mean value or to calculate the magnitude of fluctuations in some predetermined frequencies [1]. Subsequently, recognizing the intrinsic fractal-like features of a human heartbeat, a notable number of nonlinear HRV methods, derived from the mathematics of fractal geometry and confined to second-order linear characteristics, have emerged, assessing the self-similarity of ECG signals by calculating a single correlation exponent and thus delineating the monofractal properties of RR time series [2–5]. However, in 1999 Ivanov et al. have found that a healthy human heart beat displays not only monofractal but also multifractal behavior, which defies the basic mathematical principles of nonlinear methodologies [7,8]. In contrast to homogenous monofractal signals, multifractal signals display such an extraordinary complexity and self-similarity over multiple time and space scales that they cannot be indexed by a single global Hurst exponent. Therefore, a multifractal approach of HRV analysis, utilizing numerous (theoretically countless) local Hurst exponents to fully and adequately characterize the scaling properties of a multifractal signal, was introduced [7,8]. Multifractal methodology possesses the ability to illuminate abnormalities of heart rate behavior in various pathological conditions, not evident with conventional linear and nonlinear HRV techniques. Compared to established HRV methods, multifractal analysis has been shown to be superior in differentiating healthy subjects from patients with congestive heart failure or coronary artery disease [1,7–11]. However, only few attempts have been made so far to evaluate multifractal dynamics in patients undergoing different cardiac procedures such as percutaneous coronary intervention or coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) surgery [12,13]. Using linear and nonlinear HRV approaches by several authors a significantly deranged autonomic modulation with vagal withdrawal and sympathetic predominance was observed following both beating and arrested heart procedures [14,15], however, currently it remains unsettled whether such medical interventions can substantially affect also the multifractal behavior and if doing so, what are the direction and the degree of potential disturbances.

Numerous epidemiological studies are highlighting the existence of a circadian pattern in the onset of adverse cardio- and cerebro-vascular events (such as acute myocardial infarction, sudden death, malignant arrhythmias and stroke), which have a peak occurrence rate in the morning hours just after awaking [1,6,16]. Although the exact physiological mechanisms underlying this phenomenon are far from being clearly identified, it is believed, that the transition between the sleep and wake phases is a period of potentially increased neuroautonomic instability because it requires a transition from a more to a less dynamic regulation of the heart [16–18]. Using established nonlinear HRV methods, loss of circadian rhythm in chaotic behavior of RR time series was observed in patients with (un)stable coronary artery disease, heart failure or following myocardial infarction and in survivors of cardiac arrest [1,4,17,19–21]. Furthermore, a growing body of evidence suggests that also multifractal behavior of human heart beat is closely related to control mechanisms that follow the circadian profile. Using multifractal HRV analysis, the majority of authors have implied, that in healthy individuals a higher degree of complexity and stronger anti-correlation with vagal predominance exist during the night (nighttime period), whereas a lesser degree of complexity and a weaker anti-correlation behavior with sympathetic domination occurs during the day (daytime period) [6,16,17,20]. Whether invasive medical or surgical procedures can affect the circadian patterns as assessed my multifractal approach and thus subjecting patients to additional risk by enhancing neurohumoral instability with additionally pronounced transitions between more and less anti-correlated states, remains unveiled [18,21,22].

Our aim in this study was to observe the multifractal behavior of the heart rate dynamics and its circadian pattern in patients undergoing myocardial revascularization on the beating heart (off-pump CABG) whereby cardiac function and autonomic nervous modulation is maintained in surgically less aggressive and more physiological manner.

@&#METHODS@&#

Sixty consecutive patients undergoing off-pump CABG surgery in a single medical center were enrolled in the study. A written informed consent was obtained from all patients prior to the measurements. The study protocol conforms to the ethical guidelines of the Declaration of Helsinki (Finland, 1975) and was approved by Slovenian national human research committee. Inclusion criteria were isolated stable multivessel coronary artery disease, sinus rhythm before the surgical procedure as confirmed by a 12-lead electrocardiographic (ECG) recording and chronic therapy with β-blockers. Exclusion criteria were emergency operation, conversion to on-pump CABG, concomitant valvular disease, any rhythm other than sinus rhythm prior to the procedure or permanent pacemaker, diabetes mellitus with late neurological impairment, kidney, liver, thyroid, systemic or malignant disease, sleeping disorders (including central and obstructive sleep apnea, insomnia, restless legs syndrome, narcolepsy and night terrors), new myocardial infarction within one month and <95% of pure sinus beats in the recordings. Preoperative clinical data were collected and recorded.

Induction of general anesthesia was performed in a standardized manner with fentanyl, midazolam and vencuronium bromide. For maintaining narcosis a continuous infusion of propofol was given. All operations were carried out through median sternotomy on the beating heart without cardiopulmonary bypass by the same surgical team. The details of off-pump CABG surgery have been described in depth elsewhere [23]. After the procedure all patients were transferred to the intensive care unit and continuously monitored for the first four days. Later clinical observation was performed. β-blocker therapy was discontinued on the day of the procedure and continued again postoperatively, guided by hemodynamic criteria but in no patient later than on the third postoperative day.

24-h Holter recordings were obtained one day before surgery and on the seventh postoperative day by portable three-channel digital recorders (Aspel AsPEKT 702 and Schiller MT-101) with sampling rate of 128-Hz. The subjects were requested not to smoke or drink any caffeinated beverages 24h prior to measurements. During the Holter data acquisition all patients were hospitalized and accommodated in the surgical ward under continuous medical surveillance. Normal in-hospital bedside activity was allowed from 6:00 to 22:00 and bed rest (i.e. sleeping) was requested from 22:00 to 6:00.

Digitally collected electrocardiographic data was transferred to a computer and processed with commercially available software (HolCard 24W, Aspel, Poland). The location of the R-wave peak was determined with a resolution of 1ms through interpolation. Each beat was classified and labeled with the respect to its site of origin using template-matching technique. Later, all events were visually labeled by an experienced observer and corrected, if necessary. Editing eliminated all abnormal beats, including the ones succeeding ventricular or supraventricular ectopic beats without any interpolation attempted for eliminated intervals. To eliminate outliers due to missed beat detections, a moving-window average filter was applied next. For each set of five contiguous NN intervals, a local average was computed excluding the central interval. If the value of the central interval was 20% greater or smaller then the local average, it was considered to be an outlier and replaced by the local average. Finally, HRV analyses were performed only from the RR time series with more than 95% of qualified sinus beats [7]. Time-domain analyses were calculated from the entire 24-h data set, frequency-domain analyses from 5-min segments and multifractal analysis from both daytime (12:00–18:00) and nighttime (0:00–6:00) periods or the ECG recording [1,7].

Time- and frequency-domain analyses included the calculation of conventional and well established HRV parameters.

For time-domain HRV assessment, SDNN (standard deviation of all NN intervals, an estimate of overall HRV), SDANN (standard deviation of the averages of NN intervals in all 5-min segments of the entire recording, an estimate of long-term components of HRV), p50NN (number of pairs of adjacent NN intervals differing by more than 50ms divided by the total number of all NN intervals), HRVTI (HRV triangular index – total number of all NN intervals divided by height of the histogram of all NN intervals measured on a discrete scale with bins of 1/128s, an estimate of overall HRV) and RMSSD (the square root of the mean of the sum of the squares of differences between adjacent NN intervals, an estimate of short-term components of HRV) were calculated [1]. The power spectrum of HRV was estimated using the fast-Fourier transform analysis. The sum of spectral components within the frequency range from 0.01 to 0.40Hz was defined as total power (TP). The areas of spectral peaks in the subranges 0.04–0.15Hz and 0.15–0.40Hz were defined as low-frequency (LF) power indicating modulated sympathetic activity and high-frequency (HF) power indicating vagal modulation. The LF:HF ratio, indicating sympatho-vagal balance, was calculated as the ratio of LF and HF powers [1]. The clinical significance and usability of calculated parameter was in details described elsewhere [1].

Multifractal analysis was performed by wavelet modulus maxima method as proposed by Ivanov et al. using freely available software at http://www.physionet.org for proper calculation [7]. Briefly, we used the third derivate of the Gaussian function as the analyzing wavelet to estimate the scaling of an appropriately chosen global measure: the q moments of the probability distribution of the maxima of wavelet transform Z
                        
                           q
                        (a). The scaling of the partition function Z
                        
                           q
                        (a) with scale a was obtained from daytime and nighttime segments of the RR time series. We calculated the multifractal spectrum τ as τ(q) for moments q from −5 to 5 and scales a=2×1.15
                           i
                        , i=0,…41. τ(q) are obtained from the slope of the curves in the region 16<a<700, thus eliminating the influence of any residual small-scale random noise due to signal pre-processing as well as extreme, large-scale fluctuations of the signal. Noteworthy, τ(q) is a linear function for monofractal signals and a nonlinear for multifractal signals [7–9,24]. Singularity spectra D(h), which is obtained as the Legendre transform of τ(q), measures the fractal dimension of the subsets of the signal characterized by local Hurst exponent (h). For certain values of q, the exponents τ(q) have familiar meanings. In particular, τ(q=2) is related to the global Hurts exponent (H), a measure of long-range correlations, through the well known relation: H=½ (τ(q=2)+1) [7,18]. Fluctuations in the heartbeat dynamics are strongly anti-correlated (i.e. multifractal) if the dominant scaling exponents h or the global Hurst exponent H have values close to 0 as in healthy young individuals and less anti-correlated (i.e. getting uncorrelated, tending toward monofractality) if the dominant scaling exponents h or the global Hurst exponent H are close to ½ as in different pathological states [7,8]. In earlier studies multifractal spectrum τ for the moment of probability distribution q= 2 and 3 (τ(q=2) and τ(q=3)), the width of singularity spectra D(h) (Δh) and the value of local exponent h at the peak position of singularity spectra D(h) (h_top) were established as multifractal parameters with a very strong ability to differentiate between mono- and multifractal signals [7–9,24]. Amaral et el. have observed a marked loss of multifractality in states of controlled parasympathetic blockade with a significant changes of τ(q=3), h_top and Δh parameters and a somewhat smaller decay in states of controlled sympathetic blockade with a significant change of Δh and only moderate change of τ(q=3) and h_top indices, implying that τ(q=3) and h_top indices reflect the parasympathetic activity and Δh parameter the activity of both branches of the autonomic nervous system [24]. Latest studies have shown that values of τ(q=2) and τ(q=3) close to −0.8, of h_top closer to zero and of Δh more positive represent a multifractal signal, whereas values of τ(q=2) and τ(q=3) that are less negative, of h_top closer to ½ and of Δh less positive depicts a breakdown of multifractal spectrum [8,19,24]. In this work τ(q=2), τ(q=3), Δh and h_top were calculated for daytime and nighttime periods from preoperative and postoperative ECG recordings.

Distributions of all the studied parameters were checked using descriptive statistics and graphical displays (histograms, boxplots, normal probability plots). Paired-samples t-test was used for testing the difference between pre-and postoperative and day- and nighttime values in normally (or approximately normally) distributed variables. If normality and equal variance tests failed, the exact Wilcoxon matched-pairs test (EWMPT) was used. A p value of <0.05 was considered statistically significant. Statistical analyses were performed using the SPSS for Windows 14.0.2 software (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA, 2006).

@&#RESULTS@&#

After the surgery, 11 participants were excluded from the study: one patient died due to perioperative myocardial infarction, one patient required an emergency conversion from off-pump to on-pump CABG and 9 patients were excluded as their preoperative or postoperative recordings comprised more than 5% of ectopic beats and measurement artifacts. Hence, ECG recordings from 49 patients were considered for final analyses. 
                        Table 1 depicts included patient׳s clinical characteristics.

The time- and frequency-domain indices obtained one day before and seven days after the surgery are presented in 
                        Table 2. Since normality and equal variance tests failed for all calculated linear HRV parameters, the exact Wilcoxon matched-pairs test (EWMPT) was used to calculate the differences between preoperative and postoperative values. In the present study, all observed linear HRV parameters significantly declined after the surgical procedure (p from <0.001 to 0.015) (Table 2).

The multifractality parameters obtained before and after the surgical procedure are presented in 
                        Table 3 and 
                        Fig. 1. Because the nonparametric statistical tests yielded virtually identical p-values as the parametric tests (Table 3), only p-values from the latter are reported in the text. This was expected because histograms and boxplots showed that the studied parameters were approximately normally distributed, and it is also in agreement with the fact that the means and medians in Table 2 are virtually identical.

In our study the preoperative values of τ(q=2), τ(q=3) and h_top parameters were higher than those reported for healthy subjects and lower than those reported for patients with congestive heart failure, whereas the values of Δh parameter were higher than those reported for healthy subjects and patients with congestive heart failure (Table 3) [7–10,17,24,25]. Postoperatively, a significant increase of τ(q=2) and τ(q=3) for daytime was observed (from −0.60±0.12 to −0.49±0.15, p<0.001 for τ(q=2) and from −0.52±0.18 to −0.43±23, p=0.015 for τ(q=3)) as well as a significant increase of h_top and Δh in daytime and nighttime periods (from 0.20±0.07 to 0.25±0.07, p<0.001 and from 0.15±0.07 to 0.19±0.06, p=0.002 for h_top, and from 0.31±0.14 to 0.41±0.20, p=0.003 and from 0.17±0.14 to 0.31±0.19, p<0.001 for Δh for daytime and nighttime, respectively), as seen in Table 2 and Fig. 1.

Circadian patterns of multifractal parameters one day before and seven days after the surgery are summarized in Table 3.

Before surgery, the values of τ(q=3) for daytime and nighttime did not differ significantly (−0.52±0.18 vs. −0.49±0.17, p=0.618), whereas the values of h_top and Δh were significantly lower for the nighttime (0.20±0.07 vs. 0.15±0.07, p<0.001 and 0.31±0.14 vs. 0.17±0.14, p=0.01, respectively) and values of τ(q=2) significantly higher for the nighttime (−0.60±0.12 vs. −0.54±0.12, p=0.006). After the surgical procedure, the values of τ(q=2), τ(q=3), h_top and Δh were significantly lower for the nighttime (−0.49±0.015 vs. −0.55±0.08, p=0.016, −0.43±0.23 vs. −0.52±0.15, p=0.021, 0.25±0.07 vs. 0.19±0.06, p<0.001 and 0.41±0.20 vs. 0.31±0.19, p=0.002, respectively).

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

HRV analysis is a well recognized noninvasive tool in studying the cardiac autonomous modulation, exhibiting its usefulness in the diagnosis, characterization and classification of cardiac pathologies and providing information about the individual risk for adverse effects such as (non)malignant rhythm disturbances or even sudden cardiac death [1]. A substantial number of studies have reported on depressed time- and frequency-domain linear HRV parameters in patients with various cardiac pathologies, suggesting sympathetic enhancement with or without a concomitant vagal withdrawal in these individuals and robustly identifying subgroups of patients with highest risk for different adverse effects [1–6,26–30]. In the current study, well established time- and frequency-domain linear HRV parameters were calculated to compare our findings with previous studies reporting on HRV changes following open heart surgery, to assure the equivalency of our study population to groups of patients from earlier studies and to additionally validate the multifractal method that we applied. Preoperative values of linear HRV parameters in our patient population were similar to values of individuals with multivessel coronary artery disease (CAD) reported in earlier papers [1,27,29]. In the present work, all calculated time- and frequency domain indices showed a significant postoperative decline, indicating a strong tendency toward less variability and a predominance of sympathetic regulation after off-pump CABG. However, since human heartbeat is essentially nonstationary and highly complex the nonlinear HRV techniques derived from mathematics of complex dynamics fractal geometry have been proven to be superior in clarifying changes of autonomic activity in coronary artery disease, rhythm disturbances, heart failure or following myocardial infarction and in independently predicting benign and malignant arrhythmias, sudden cardiac death and mortality after myocardial infarction [4,26–30]. Furthermore, applying selected nonlinear HRV techniques in our earlier studies we have confirmed that a profound derangement of sympathovagal balance occurs not only as a result of underlying disease but also as a consequence of a surgical procedure be it with or without the utilization of extracorporeal circulation [14,15].

In the last decade it became evident that human heartbeat belongs to a special class of multifractal bio-signals displaying such an extraordinary complexity and self-similarity over multiple time and space scales that it cannot be indexed by a single global exponent [7,8]. Therefore, multifractal analysis does not focus on the quantification of only one global exponent to characterize the 1/f like scaling of the power spectra as does the conventional nonlinear approach observing only monofractal behavior, but instead uses many (theoretically countless) local exponents to fully and adequately characterize the scaling properties of a signal [1–3]. Several scientists have reported on marked reduction of multifractality in advanced age, in states of iatrogenic sympathetic and parasympathetic blockade and in patients with atrial fibrillation, angina pectoris or congestive heart failure [7,9,10,11,19,21,24,31,32]. Recent evidence implies that compared to other nonlinear HRV analyses, multifractal technique better discriminates healthy subjects from patients with heart failure or stable coronary artery disease [7,9,10,11,21]. In the light of these findings the preoperative values of τ(q=2), τ(q=3) and h_top parameters in the current study indicate that a marked decay of multifractal behavior occurred already preoperatively in our patients, clearly showing that in these individuals a cardiac autonomic disbalance with a sympathetic predominance existed already prior to the surgical intervention. Such results are in accord with previous studies as well as with our own observations reporting on diminished linear and selected nonlinear HRV parameters in older patients with stable multivessel coronary artery disease [1–4,14,15]. Since the Δh parameter is known to strongly correlate also with the sympathetic activity, a higher preoperative values of parameter Δh in our group as compared to healthy subjects might suggest that the preoperative sympathovagal disbalance in our patients can be mainly attributed to sympathetic overdrive and to a lesser degree to parasympathetic decrement [24].

The significant postoperative increase of h_top and τ(q=3) parameters for daytime period shows that a further decline of multifractal behavior into monofractal and a weaker anti-correlation are present following off-pump CABG. Furthermore, a significant postoperative increase of τ(q=2) and hence an increase of global Hurst exponent H towards the values closer to ½ additionally indicates that postoperatively RR interval fluctuations are less anti-correlated and thus turning from multi- to monofractal [7,8,24]. Finding, that multifractal spectrum decreases to monofractal not only in cardiovascular disease states but also after different cardiac procedures is of special interest from physiological perspective and rises a question whether same control mechanisms regulating heart beat dynamics are accountable for the loss of multifractality in both settings. Control mechanisms regulating heart beat are believed to interact as a part of a coupled cascade of feedback loops in a system operating far from equilibrium [2,7,24,33]. A breakdown of these loops due to advanced disease or surgical procedure might be responsible for the breakdown of multifractal complexity into monofractal [7–9,11]. However, the exact electrophysiological mechanisms causing such postoperative dysregulation remain unclear [14,15,33]. Significantly higher postoperative values of Δh parameter in our study indicate a considerable postoperative increase in sympathetic activity, which is in agreement with previous works describing sympathetic augmentation after surgical intervention [1,14,15,34]. Noteworthy, the profile of pre- and postoperative changes of Δh index might suggest, that in hyperadrenergic settings Δh is a marker of sympathetic modulation while in vagal settings it mirrors both branches of cardiac autonomous activity [24]. In addition, significant postoperative increase of τ(q=3) and h_top, indices describing parasympathetic modulation, signalizes that postoperative sympathetic enhancement is accompanied by a profound withdrawal of vagal activity indicating that the loss of multifractal dynamicity and anti-correlation in the first week after the procedure is a reflection of perturbations in both branches of the autonomic nervous system [14,15].

In recent years evidence has accumulated that dynamical scale-invariant features of heartbeat fluctuations exhibit a significant endogenous circadian pattern, independent from environmental conditions and daily activities [4,6,16,17,33,35]. Applying time- and frequency domain HRV indices in healthy subjects, several authors have reported on a notable day–night variation in all linear parameters with higher daytime values, indicating higher vagal modulation at night [1]. Further, using selected nonlinear parameters, Becker, Vandeput and Ivanov have separately reported on a considerable day–night variation in autonomic activity with a significantly higher degree of complexity and stronger anti-correlation during the night in healthy individuals [6,16,17]. However, employing multifractal technique in healthy individuals, inconsistent findings regarding the changes in circadian rhythm were reported. While Ivanov et al. and Makowiec et al. have shown that nighttime possesses stronger multifractal organization and stronger anti-correlation as compared to daytime, Ramchurn suggested, that nighttime is less anti-correlated but that it has the same complexity as daytime [7,18,22]. Over recent years several authors have reported on diminished circadian pattern in different cardiac pathologies [1,4,19]. Applying nonlinear technique of correlation dimension, Otsuka et al. have shown that circadian variation is lost in patients with advanced coronary artery disease, whereas Carvajal et el. have proven the same for patient with congestive heart failure [20,25]. In our study, significantly lower values of h_top index at nighttime, significantly higher values of τ(q=2) index at nighttime and insignificant difference between day- and nighttime of τ(q=3) parameter preoperatively implicates that in our patients a partial destruction of circadian variation with less pronounced difference between day- and nighttime anti-correlation characteristics existed before the surgical intervention. This finding is in accordance with prevoius reports on decreased circadian pattern of heartbeat anti-correlation characteristics in eldery and in individuals with advanced coronary artery disease or stable angina pectoris [16–18,20]. Noteworthy, Chiu et el have shown that the decay of multifractal spectrum in advanced heart failure can be party reversed by β-blockers [9]. Thus, partially maintained circadian variation observed in our study preoperatively might be a consequence of a strict adherence to β-blocker therapy that was only withdrawn at the day of surgery. Interestingly, significantly lower postoperative values of τ(q=2), τ(q=3) and h_top parameters for nighttime as compared to daytime imply that a partial restoration of circadian pattern and a more pronounced difference between day- and nighttime anti-correlation behavior might occur after surgical myocardial revascularization. Since the exact mechanisms underlying the neurohumoral influence on key physiological processes such as heartbeat dynamics are not completely clarified [1,2,4,7,32,36] it remains unclear which modality has the strongest impact on the restoration of the circadian pattern after surgical intervention. One possible explanation is that the postoperative influence of autonomic activity on ECGs circadian rhythm is merely masked by inflammation, electrolyte imbalance, volume changes, oxidative stress and hormonal perturbations that accompany every major surgical procedure [14,37]. Noteworthy, another possible explanation might be related to the change in sleeping pattern of patients early after the surgery. It is known, that vagal activity dominates during non-REM (rapid eye movement) sleeping phases, while a higher sympathetic modality is observed in the REM phases of sleeping and in wake state [17,18]. Several authors have speculated on the assumption that the vagal activity during non-REM phases accounts for more anti-correlated behavior (i.e. multifractal) during night, whereas many arousal episodes with high sympathetic activity accounts for less anti-correlated behavior (i.e. tending monofractal) as seen in elderly with physiologically declining ability to initiate and maintain deep- and REM-sleep and accompanied by high frequency of arousals [18]. In everyday clinical practice almost all heart surgery patients are treated early postoperatively with opioid and non-steriod anti-rheumatic analgesics to control postoperative pain and with sedative-hypnotic or antipsychotic medication to avoid postsurgical confusions and enhance the cognitive recovery after the procedure, all of which have an important impact on the pattern and quality of sleep. Postoperatively, our patients were also treated according to VAS (visual analog scale of pain) and CAM (confusion assessment method) scores and to evidence-based clinical judgment, receiving medications based on good clinical practice. Thus, the postoperative recovery of circadian pattern of multifractality seen in our group might also partially be explained by medication-induced alteration in REM/non-REM sleeping pattern with decreased or even diminished episodes of arousals in the first week after the procedure.

Profoundly deranged cardiac autonomic modulation after surgical revascularization is one of the most important factors precipitating arrhythmias in postishemic myocardium after surgery [14,15]. Earlier findings suggest that vagal withdrawal and concomitant increase in sympathetic tone might be the primary triggers of postoperative arrhythmias [14,15,36–39]. In our previous study applying nonlinear detrended fluctuation and fractal dimension analyses we were able to show that patients developing postoperative arrhythmias had a more extensive impairment of autonomic activity after the procedure as compared to patients remaining in stable sinus rhythm [15]. The correlation between the postoperative decay of multifractal spectrum as well as changes in circadian variation and the clinical outcomes such as arrhythmic events or mortality after coronary bypass surgery remains unclear and calls for further studies. In addition, our present study describes changes of multifractal spectrum in the earliest time period following surgery; however, a longer postoperative follow-up would add further value in understanding how fractal dynamics changes during weeks or even months after the procedure allowing for the assessment of postoperative autonomic remodeling.

Our study has several possible limitations. A growing body of evidence consistently indicates that multifracal behavior of heartbeat dynamics is strongly age dependant with decreasing multifractality with aging. While interpreting the results of the present trial special attention should be paid to the fact that that our study population was in average over 60 years old, yet homogenous in relation to age and similar to the general heart surgery patient population. Hence, a certain degree of preoperative impairment of multifractality (i.e impairment of baseline values of multifractal parameters) in our group can be attributed not only to different pathologies (i.e. advanced CAD) and medical interventions (i.e. intake of different medications) but also to advanced age. However, the significant postoperative decline of multifractal behavior cannot be biased by this variable, since the postoperative recordings were performed only seven days after the surgery. In addition to that, nowadays it is evident that β-blocker therapy changes the values of multifractal parameters since this medication partially reverses the decay of multifractal spectrum. All patients included in our study had been on β-blocker therapy before and after the procedure. Preoperative medication was withdrawn on the day of surgery and was continued postoperatively as soon as hemodynamic stability was sustained, but in no patient later than on the third postoperative day. Close adherence to evidence-based medical therapy in our group is in fact a strength of the study rather than a limitation; however, 100% adherence to β-blocker therapy makes absolute values of preselected indices obtained by multifractal analysis in our trial harder to compare to absolute values of observed parameters from earlier studies, where adherence to medical therapy was not consistent or even not reported.

@&#SUMMARY@&#

Since the work of Ivanov et al. in 1999 it is evident, that human heartbeat belongs to a special class of multifractal biosignals, displaying extraordinary complexity and self-similarity over multiple time and space scales. Therefore, multifractal approach of the HRV analysis, using many local Hurst exponents to fully and adequately characterize the scaling properties of a complex multifractal signal, has been introduced. Compared to conventional linear and nonlinear HRV methodologies, multifractal analysis better discriminates healthy subjects from patients with congestive heart failure or stable coronary artery disease. Nevertheless, knowledge about the impact of different cardiac procedures such as percutaneous coronary intervention or open heart surgery on multifractal behavior of the human heartbeat is very limited. Furthermore, data describing the profile of changes in ECGs circadian rhythm using multifractal analysis are incomplete and inconsistent. Hence, we observed the multifractal behavior of the heart rate dynamics in patients undergoing off-pump CABG, determining eventual difference between daytime and nighttime periods in these individuals from a multifractal perspective. Additional to conventional HRV parameters, multifractal behavior of the RR data set was determined using Ivanov׳s wavelet modulus maxima method with calculation of predetermined multifractal parameters τ(q=2) (multifractal spectrum τ for the moment of probability distribution q=2), τ(q=3) (multifractal spectrum τ for the moment of probability distribution q=3), Δh (the width of singularity spectra D(h)) and h_top (the value of local exponent h at the peak position of singularity spectra D(h)). Preoperative values and postoperative decline of linear HRV indices in the current trial were in agreement with earlier reports, confirming that our cohort was similar to earlier study populations. A significant decline of all calculated linear HRV parameters indicates a strong tendency toward less variability and a predominance of sympathetic regulation after off-pump CABG. Preoperative values of multifractal parameters indicate that a moderate impairment of multifractal behavior was present already preoperatively, clearly showing that in individuals with stable multivessel CAD an autonomic modulation imbalance with a sympathetic predominance exists already prior to the surgical intervention. Postoperatively, a marked decay of multifractal scaling properties into monofractal and a significant sympathetic overdrive with concomitant vagal withdrawal was observed. Furthermore, the circadian pattern of multifractal behavior was partially diminished preoperatively and a restoration of the day–night variation in multifractal behavior was observed after the surgery. Our findings raise an intriguing possibility that this recovery might be due to the medication-induced alteration in sleeping pattern with decreased or diminished episodes of arousals in the first week after the procedure.

None declared.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

