@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#A system design for surveillance systems protecting critical infrastructures

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           System design based on assessment of user needs through domain expert interviews.


                        
                        
                           
                           The system design will alert operators of threats carried out by persons/vehicles.


                        
                        
                           
                           Surveillance capabilities to protect critical infrastructures are demonstrated.


                        
                        
                           
                           The design includes systems capabilities, the systems structure and its processes.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Security systems

Surveillance systems

Critical infrastructure

User requirements

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


                  Critical infrastructures are attractive targets for attacks by intruders with different hostile aims. Modern information and sensor technology provides abilities to detect such attacks. The objective of this work is to outline a system design for surveillance systems aimed at protection of critical infrastructures, with the focus on early threat detection at the perimeter of critical infrastructures. The outline of the system design is based on an assessment of stakeholder needs. The needs were identified from interviews with domain experts and system operators. The system design of the surveillance system and the user requirements in terms of capabilities were then determined. The result consists of the system design for surveillance systems, comprising the systems capabilities, the systems structure, and the systems process. The outcome of the work will have an impact on the implementation of the surveillance systems with respect to the sensors utilized, the sensor data algorithms and the fusion techniques.
               

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

In recent times, the risk for critical infrastructures to be subject to attacks from various groups of terrorists or criminals has become increasingly high and therefore they must be protected. To accomplish sufficient surveillance, modern information technology could be used. Such surveillance systems need to be based on modern sensors and sensor systems with advanced sensor-data analysis and data fusion. However, to accomplish systems of high quality, they must be based on the stakeholders’ needs, so that needed capabilities can be provided. The means of these capabilities are to support the system operators in their work to handle upcoming events and incidents enforced by intruders and to protect the facilities from external attacks [1]. Hence, to accomplish such surveillance systems it is essential to put a sufficient amount of resources on the early stages of the development, which is to identify the stakeholder needs and to define the user requirements in terms of system capabilities. To enhance the realization of such systems they should be based on an adequate system design. Thereby, the probability to get useful systems that provide the means to support handling of incidents and crisis management will increase and help to avoid or at least minimize the consequences of attacks on critical infrastructure facilities. An approach that can be taken to determine the system design may be based on the assessment of stakeholder needs through series of interviews with a number of especially appointed domain experts and security personnel.

The work presented in this article has been carried out as a part of The Privacy Preserving Perimeter Protection Project (P5), co-funded by the European Union. The objective of the project is to demonstrate an intelligent perimeter surveillance system that can operate in all weather and light conditions and with privacy preserving properties. The system will monitor the area just outside the boundary of critical infrastructure facilities and, thereby, be able to provide early warnings of terrestrial and airborne threats. The system need to have a low false alarm rate, e.g., due to animals and other innocuous events, combined with high level of threat detection sensitivity.

The objective of the work presented in this article is to design a surveillance system aimed at protection of critical infrastructures. In particular, the surveillance systems should be able to support the security staff at the facility to detect and respond to attacks from intruders at an early stage and thus the protection and surveillance of the perimeter of the facilities will be in focus to make it possible to give early warnings. The system should alert the operators of threats carried out by different types of objects, (persons, vehicles, etc.). Eventually, these capabilities of warnings should be realized by state-of-the-art sensor solutions. However, it is out of scope of the work presented in this article to determine what sensors and what methods for sensor-data analysis and fusion to use.

The physical context in which surveillance systems of critical infrastructures operate is varying from facility to facility; especially with respect to the perimeter, which also differ with respect to the type of infrastructure that should be protected. Generally, the critical infrastructure facility can be described as containing a central complex, i.e., the surveilled area of the critical infrastructure with one or several buildings and installations as illustrated in 
                     Fig. 1.

The surveilled area is surrounded by the perimeter that differs in width with respect to its extension. Thus, in general, the perimeter can be defined as illustrated in Fig. 1 where the perimeter is made up by the restricted area, the boundary of the facility, a strip of the outside area, and the airspace above the facility. In some cases, there is no restricted area and thus the boundary of the facility coincides with the boundary of the surveilled area. The outside strip of concern must also be determined from facility to facility. To observe is also that, in some cases, the facility may in part be surrounded by water. The terrain type of different facilities, perimeters differ and the surveillance system must be able to adapt to such differences in the environment.

@&#METHODS@&#

The work was carried out with two main activities: a needs assessment activity and an outline of the design of the surveillance systems.

The needs assessment was performed in six steps. The initial step was to determine who the stakeholders are, which of them should be given the opportunity to influence the development of the system, and how their statements should be collected. The work was carried out during a workshop, involving the project management, in which different categories of stakeholders were identified, such as systems operators, business managers, and security managers. Thus, it was decided which categories of stakeholders should be provided the opportunity to influence the design of the system. The second step was to interview the stakeholders to get statements concerning the surveillance system. The respondents were selected as good representatives of the selected stakeholder categories. Interview questions that focus on the specific problems subject to the studies were developed based on the critical incident technique (CIT). CIT is as a technique for collecting observed incidents that have significance impact on the performing activities [2]. Each interview was carried out by two persons; one that asked the questions and another responsible for recording the answers through note taking. The third step of the needs assessment was to interpret the collected statements to determine the actual needs. When asking stakeholders about what needs they have, they will use descriptions of, e.g., problematic situations that they have experienced and technical solutions that they believe can be useful to them [3]. The voice of the customer table (VCT) was used for analyzing statements to reveal the actual needs [1,4]. The outcome from this step was a large set of unstructured and unsorted needs. An illustration of the use of the VCT can be found in 
                        Fig. 2. In the first column the captured statements are inserted, one row for each statement. The following columns describe an analysis of who asked for the need, what they want to do with it, when they want to do it, where they would like to do it, why they would do it, and how they would do it. Eventually, in the last column the concluded need can be filled in, hopefully with a correct understanding of what the statement really implied.

The fourth step was to thoroughly analyze the identified needs, to unify the formulation of the needs and, thereby, identify and discard duplicates of needs. Further, the analysis also included to determine if any needs had been left out, and if appropriate add the missing ones. To accomplish this and due to the amount of needs, it was necessary to categorize the needs. This step was performed by using affinity diagrams and hierarchy diagrams [4]. The fifth step was to validate the needs. This was carried out in a workshop with stakeholder representatives. During the workshop the identified needs were presented to the stakeholders’ representatives; based on their comments inaccuracies were corrected. The sixth step was to prioritize the needs in terms of stakeholder value; which is common practice in systems engineering to select needs with the highest values to the stakeholders and disregard needs that make the system unnecessarily complex [5]. During a workshop, the stakeholders’ representatives were asked to prioritize, on a scale from 0 to 3, the identified needs based on how important they considered the needs to be; taking into account the scope of the project. In this case 3 means the highest importance and 0 not important. The highest prioritized needs, 3 and 2, were established as the needs that should constitute the foundation for the determination of the capabilities. However, when the system is realized other aspect should be considered as well, such as technical limitations and business values.

The outline of the system design was carried out in three steps as definition of (1) the systems capabilities, (2) the systems structure, and (3) the systems process. The initial step, to define the systems capabilities was based on the needs with the highest priorities. The capabilities were compiled and elaborated to a coherent set of capabilities, documented in a hierarchical diagram [4]. The validation of the capabilities was performed during several workshops where the developers presented the capabilities to the stakeholder representatives. The provided comments and suggestions were analyzed and appropriately incorporated in the set of capabilities. The second step was to define the structure of the systems, i.e., systems components that together provide the defined capabilities. The third step was to define the systems process. That is outlining how the systems accomplish the capabilities, as activity diagrams [4].

After the first version of the system design was completed, validation of the design was performed with stakeholder representatives and technical experts. The latter were experts on surveillance techniques.

The outcome of this study is a system design of surveillance systems for protection of critical infrastructures. The design is based on the systems capabilities, the systems structure, and its process.

The systems capability structure is hierarchical and will thus include sets of subordinate capabilities and a number of leaf capabilities. Leaf capabilities with attachments to the Sensor data analysis and fusion modules are either of the type Track (an entity in an event), Detect and Watch (entities). Detect and Watch are concerned with the detection of objects deviating from normal inside the boundary of the facility respectively outside the facility boundary. Track is concerned with tracking of deviating objects. Detect should here be interpreted in the traditional way, that is to detect some type of object and collect information of all kinds that relates to that object. Watch is similar to Detect but since different legislation is applied to the outside area (in most countries), sensor types that directly can identify individuals are not allowed on the outside due to privacy legislation that must be followed and for this reason the capability type Watch is introduced as a way of demonstrating the difference between the two concepts.

The general interpretation of the capabilities is that a certain capability is not enabled until all its subordinate capabilities have been enabled or when a leaf node has been supplied with relevant event-related information or in some other way terminated.

The ultimate capability for the protection and the surveillance of critical infrastructures in this work is Handle facility protection. This capability has four subordinate capabilities Handle surveillance, Handle deviation, Handle incident and Handle user interactions (
                        Fig. 3).

The capability Handle surveillance is concerned with surveillance of the perimeter of the facility, which on the next lower level is utilized by the four capabilities: Surveil Restricted area, Surveil Boundary fence, Surveil Airspace, and Watch Outside area (
                        Fig. 4). Further capabilities are Surveil with respect to the given context, which primarily concerns, e.g., whether the land of the perimeter includes land as well as water areas. Surveil with respect to given constraints is essentially concerned with privacy aspects while Surveil at different states is focusing on day, night and weather conditions. These capabilities are all aimed at the surveillance of the facility perimeter. Furthermore, the capability Handle surveillance relates to aspects like: the system should be able to operate, e.g., without interruption, during all weather conditions and with respect to privacy considerations.

An illustration to the deeper levels of the four perimeter surveillance-oriented capabilities in Fig. 3 can be seen in 
                        Fig. 5, which shows how they are divided further into surveillance of the land and the sea areas and on the lowest level the detection of various types of events requested to release an alarm; this is indicated with either one of the alarm types: verified alarm (VA) or unverified alarm (UA) (section IV D). Thus, a detect capability for protection of the restricted area is formulated as Detect person behaving in a deviating way on land of restricted area (UA), which indicates that the capability determined to detect a person behaving in a deviating way and that the alarm in this case is unverified and consequently needs to be verified in some way, e.g., guards can be sent out by the operator to determine what kind of event that has occurred.

The second capability, on the second level, is the Handle deviation that has to be enabled once a deviation has been determined (
                        Fig. 6). These capabilities are concerned with the handling of the type of alarm that has been released but also to the analysis of the occurred deviation type that eventually should be reported.

The third capability, Handle incident (
                        Fig. 7), is enabled when an incident has been determined, by a verified alarm, and is concerned with the monitoring of the incident, that is, to track incident-related objects, to gather, analyze and store various kinds of incident-related information but also to request orders from and to forward information to participating persons in the crisis management organization. Eventually, the incident will be terminated.

The fourth and final capability at the top level, i.e., Handle user activities and support (
                        Fig. 8). This capability is aimed at directly support the operators to control sensors, basically of visual type, and to gather information from them. This capability can be divided into three branches where the first concerns Control sensors which on the next lower level could mean either automatic or manual control of primarily visual sensors by the operator. In the second branch information gathering should be carried out by means of the surveillance system, i.e. the Gather operational information capability; this information can either be gathered manually or automatically. The gathered information should be handled, stored and aggregated in such a way that an operational picture can be built up (the third branch). The situational picture must also be possible to adapt to the needs of the operator, e.g., by zooming and panning to follow the events going on during an incident. Among other things, the situational picture will include information of deviating objects such as detected deviations, objects, locations and tracks, and alarm-related information. This should be realized by the remaining capabilities in this last branch.

The sensor system will be concerned with the gathering of information from the perimeter, to analyze and fuse the data collected by the sensors. Once the sensor data have been analyzed the outcome can be used to enable the capabilities Detect, Watch and Track. To enable a capability the Sensor data analysis & fusion must be supplied with a procedure that, whenever a deviation has occurred, may deliver detected deviation information. This refers also to the Watch and Track capabilities. Other information of importance for the enabling of the Detect and Watch capabilities regards the alarm type that the sensor system must be able to determine for each occurred and deviating event. The relationship between the capabilities and the sensor system can be seen in 
                        Fig. 9.

The main parts of the system structure are the User interface module, the Command & control module and the Sensor system module (
                        Fig. 10). Inside the Command & control module there is the User support component that handles the surveillance processes, i.e., the Surveillance process component, the Deviation process component and the Incident process component, which also supports the user interface; this means that they are serving the operator of the surveillance system. The three surveillance process components are further discussed in section D. Furthermore, the surveillance processes are served by the Sensor data analysis & fusion component that is a part of the Sensor system module. The Sensor system module, for the most parts, delivers information about detected objects and tracks from the detected objects.

In the User interface module the users can, besides by means of the user interface, which contains the operational picture with its deviation and incident related information, also control visual sensors outside the Sensor system module by means of the Sensor control component. The purpose of these sensors is to allow the operator to follow and verify what is going on during an event. Thus, some video screens must be available for this purpose. Finally, there is also the Deviation & incident information component that supports the user in the information handling.

In Fig. 3, the top level capabilities of the capability structure were introduced. The four subordinate capabilities of the Handle facility protection are the most important capabilities for the determination of the surveillance process that eventually must be realized by the final system design. The three capabilities Handle surveillance, Handle deviation and Handle incident can all be transformed into corresponding processes, i.e., the Surveillance process, the Deviation process and the Incident process. The relationship between these three processes can be seen in 
                        Fig. 11. The Surveillance process is a single process that will be running for as long as the system is up and running. A Deviation process could trigger an alarm. A Deviation process is the result of a single registered event that is a single instance, and as several events may occur more or less simultaneously, due to some hostile and coordinated activities this may lead to the initiation of multiple deviation processes that each in turn may initiate a single Incident process. Every determined incidents will consequently lead to the start of an Incident process but as is indicated in the figure multiple incident processes may, on a higher level, be part of the same ongoing incident with multiple events or actions taken by a group of antagonists; obviously, it is the operator that must decide whether multiple events in certain incident processes belong to the same overall incident. Once any of the events in any of the deviation and incident processes have been brought to their end the corresponding processes terminate.

The alarm handling is essential to surveillance systems, because the false alarm rate must be kept low and the type of alarm precise so that the operators know when and how to act in case of serious events. An alarm is either directly verified or unverified. At a verified alarm the cause of the alarm is known with a certainty high enough to initiate a response to the event. The cause of an unverified alarm is uncertain and in such a case the immediate action is to determine its cause.

A verified alarm may turn out to be either false or the result of a failing system component. Both cases must be adjusted promptly. The third case is an incident corresponding to an event that is anything from harmless and up to something serious. In any of these cases the operators must act to keep up the security of the facility. An illustration of the type of alarm that can be determined by the sensor system may include the following information:
                           
                              Sub-area type: Land section of Restricted area

Deviation: vehicle observed at forbidden area

Alarm type: VA (verified alarm)

This will trigger a verified alarm in the Restricted area with respect to the type of subarea and the determined type of deviation (Fig. 4).

@&#RELATED WORKS@&#

In [6] a system for surveillance of critical infrastructures is described, which concerns early warnings with respect to attacks from e.g. terrorists although in this work no strong efforts for determination of user requirements have been performed. Some other work on surveillance system design with relationship to the work carried out here is the work by Jungert et al. [7]. In Goodall [8] gathering of user requirements for a visualization system with capabilities for intrusion detection analysis is discussed. Shan, Wang, Li, and Chen [9] present a comprehensive design for decision support systems within emergency response. Hansson et al. [10] demonstrates the intensions to determine the general context for security systems as a foundation for user and system requirements. In [11] is a project called RESCUE described and discussed. In this work a large variety of aspects that concerns development of system for crisis response are discussed. Among the aspects of concern that relates to the work discussed here are, e.g., the focus on systems and algorithms to support information transfer among users but also aspects that are concerned with needs assessment to eventually create means for situation awareness. A Mobile Emergency GIS for Emergency Response Management is described by Wietfeld et al. [12] in which an in-depth user requirements analysis has been carried out where also relevant features of a wireless-enabled technology platform have been derived. Furthermore, Pozzobon et al. [13] discuss user requirements of surveillance systems with special emphasis on security in ports. Oppermann et al. [14] describes a design process of a wireless network application where critical infrastructure protection is in focus. The approach is carried out in two steps where in the first step a new requirement catalog helping end-users to formulate a complete and consistent specification of wireless sensor network mission requirements and in the second a methodology to deduce fine grained technical specifications from the general requirements is discussed.

The objective of the work presented is this article was to define a system design of surveillance systems for protection of critical infrastructures, which includes a set of capabilities and a systems structure. The stakeholders’ needs have been identified and used to define the users’ requirements in terms of capabilities and a system design in collaboration with the stakeholders. The result of this work will be used as input to the other parts of the P5 project, i.e., to complete the systems architecture of the surveillance system with its sensor system and network of selected sensors.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENT@&#

This work has been performed as part of the Privacy Preserving Perimeter Protection Project (Grant number 312784), which is a European and FP7 funded project for the protection of critical infrastructures.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

