@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Plant-mediated biosynthesis and characterization of silver nanoparticles by leaf extracts of Tragia involucrata, Cymbopogon citronella, Solanum verbascifolium and Tylophora ovata
            

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           To reduce the agglomeration, we trailed the special ultra-sonication technique.


                        
                        
                           
                           Powder diffraction analysis (XRD) confirmed the crystalline nature of silver nanoparticles.


                        
                        
                           
                           The feasible mechanism of action of AgNPs was analysed by using FTIR patterns.


                        
                        
                           
                           FTIR pattern revealed the presence of Silver bonding and the functional groups responsible for reduction of Ag nanoparticles.


                        
                        
                           
                           Structural morphology of Silver nanoparticles was studied by FESEM analysis.


                        
                        
                           
                           Biomolecules of the leaf extract play dual role as both reducing and capping agents.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Bioreduction

Color change

Green synthesis

Plant extracts

Silver nanoparticles

UV analysis

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               Graphical abstract
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

In recent years, noble metal nanoparticles have been the subject of focused research due to their unique optical, electronic, mechanical, magnetic and chemical properties that are significantly different from those of bulk materials [1]. These special and unique properties could be attributed to their small sizes and large surface areas. For these reasons, metal nanoparticles have found many applications in different areas such as catalysis, photonics and electronics [2–4]. Among noble metal nanoparticles, silver nanoparticles have wide area of interest as they have large number of applications in such as non-linear optics, spectrally selective coating for solar energy absorption, biolabelling, intercalation materials for electrical batteries as optical receptors, catalyst in chemical reactions and as antibacterial capacities [5–7].

The field of nanotechnology is one of the most attractive areas of research in modern material science [8,9]. Their unique size-dependent properties make these materials superior and indispensable in many areas of human activity [10]. Although chemical and physical methods may successfully produce pure and well-defined nanoparticles, these methods were quite expensive and potentially dangerous to the environment [11]. Use of biological organisms such as microorganisms, plant extract or plant biomass could be an alternative to chemical and physical methods for the production of nanoparticles in an eco-friendly manner. Biosynthesis of nanoparticles is a sort of bottom-up approach, where the main reaction occurring is reduction [12–15]. Bio-nanotechnology combines biological principles with physical and chemical approaches to produce nano-sized particles with specific functions. It also represents an economic substitute for chemical and physical methods of nanoparticles formation [16]. Synthesizing silver nanoparticles by medicinal plants is eco-friendly and good antimicrobial efficiency against bacteria, viruses and other microorganisms [17].

Silver nanoparticles is a nontoxic, safe inorganic antibacterial agent used for centuries and is capable of killing more than 500 types of diseases causing microorganisms. It has a significant potential for a wide range of biological applications such as preventing infections, healing wounds, anti-inflammatory and use as an antibacterial agent for antibiotic resistant bacteria [18].

Hence the aim of present study is to develop a novel approach for the green synthesis of silver nanoparticles using Indian herbal plants Tragia involucrata, Cymbopogon citronella, Solanum verbascifolium and Tylophora ovata extracts as a reducing and stabilizing agent. We have carried out a unique protocol for synthesizing of Ag nanoparticles (temperature, time, extract preparation method and storage). Many researchers faced difficulty to collect the fine nanoparticles from plant liquids. In order to overcome this problem, we have formulated two type centrifugation technique. To reduce the agglomeration, we trailed the special ultra-sonication technique. This exclusive protocol could be used for large scale industrial productions. Bioreduction mechanism of these extracts for the synthesis of silver nanoparticles was investigated trough visual examination (color change), UV–vis absorption, FTIR, XRD and FESEM techniques.

For the synthesis of silver nanoparticles T. involucrata, C. citronella, S. verbascifolium and T. ovata were collected from the forest near Kallanai (South India), India with voucher number Tra 401, Cym 320, Sol 1201 and Tyl 842. They have been botanically identified in the Rapinat Herbarium (SHC- International Agenda Registration), Trichy. INDIA. A photograph of plants is shown in Fig. 1
                        . The extract is used for reducing and capping agent. Silver nitrate and ethanol were purchased from Sigma Aldrich, Germany.

These species are used in Siddha medicine, which is practised by Tamil people in Tamilnadu. This plant is used as a medicinal plant to treat the disease such as constipation, hemorrhoids, diabetes, skin disease, vomiting, giddiness and headache fevers [19–21].

The leaves and the oil of C. citronella are used to make medicine. It is used both as a medical herb and as a perfume. It is used for treating digestive tract spasms, stomach ache, high blood pressure, convulsions, pain, vomiting, cough, fever, the common cold and exhaustion [22].

The leaves of S. verbascifolium are heated and applied as emollient on the forehead for headaches [23,24].

The leaves and roots of T. ovata are used medicinally. It is said to have laxative, expectorant, diaphoretic and purgative properties. It has also been used for the treatment of allergies, cold, dysentery, hay fever and arthritis [25].

The leaves were washed with fast flowing water and then separated from its stem. Again it was washed by using deionized water and the water is removed. The sample is kept for drying. The fresh leaves then were cut into small pieces and were taken a quantity of 25 g by the help of electronic balancing scale [26,27].

The plant extract sample was then added into 125 ml of boiling deionized water, and left to boil for 5 min. The sample was taken out of the oven and kept in a place to get reduced to the room temperature. Then this sample was filtered successively through filter paper (Wattman filter paper) [28,29]. The plant extract was collected and stored at 5 °C. Finally, the extract was used for the synthesis of silver nanoparticles.

Three milliliters of plant leaves extract were added to 60 ml of 10−3 M AgNO3 solution and the reaction was left to take place at ambient conditions. A schematic of the AgNO3 preparation is shown in Fig. 2
                        . When the reaction started, we could observe a change from its colorless to transparent yellow at different intervals and then finally to a dark brown [30,31].

The dark brown color indicates the formation of silver nanoparticles. Reduction of the Ag+ ions was monitored with respect to time using UV–visible spectral analysis [32–34]. Once the reaction mixture had reached a dark brown color, then centrifuged technique was used to separate the nanoparticles from the solution (AgNO3 + Plant Extract). The solution was centrifuged at 3000 rpm for 10 min. The centrifuged supernatant liquid was collected and then centrifuged twice at 15,000 rpm for 30 min. The suspended pellet was purified by using ethanol. The purified pellets were then dried and the powder was taken and then kept inside the special automated ultra-sonicator for 30 min. The final product of silver nanoparticles was kept inside the oven at a temperature of 400 °C for 3 h prior to characterization.

The aqueous leaf extract holds main metabolites along with flavonoids, alkaloids, tannins, phytosterols, etc. In specific, flavonoids are strong reducing agents and are contributed to the reduction of Ag+ ions to nanoparticles. As flavonoids are powerful reducing agents and they may also directly scavenge molecular species of active oxygen, this antioxidant activity of flavonoids emanates from their ability to donate electrons or hydrogen atoms. The reasonable mechanism of AgNPs formation may be suggested as the flavonoids are oxidized during the reduction of Ag+ to AgNPs.

All the constituents of leaf extract are not only cogently reducing silver salt but also exhibit outstanding tenacity against agglomeration. In difference, proteins and enzymes present in the leaf extract are maybe facilitating the formation of pure AgNPs through reduction of Ag+ ions and their stabilization.

Chemistry behind the nanoparticles formation is signified in Equation 1, which states that flavonoids are responsible for the reduction of Ag+ ions and AgNPs are stabilized through negatively charged carboxylate groups of proteins. Therefore, reduction and capping processes by the biomolecules present in the leaf extract could be accountable for the lengthy stability.
                           
                              Equ. 1
                              
                                 Shows the possible silver nanoparticles formation mechanism.
                              
                              
                           
                        
                     

Ultraviolet spectra analysis was performed for all samples and the absorption maxima were analyzed at a wavelength of 350–700 nm using on a PerkinElmer Lambda-35 UV spectrometer. Deionized water was used for background correction in UV–visible absorption spectra. The characterization of functional groups on the surface of AgNPs was performed by Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR) (Perkin–Elmer, Germany), and the spectra were scanned in the 500–4000 cm−1 range at a resolution of 4 cm−1. XRD analysis was carried out on an X-ray diffractometer (X'Pert-PRO). The high resolution on XRD patterns was measured at 3 KW with Cu target using a scintillation counter (k = 1.5406 Å) at 40 kV and 40 mA. The size of the nanoparticles was calculated through the Scherrer's equation. The morphology of silver nanoparticles was examined using Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscope (FESEM JSM 6701F-6701, JPEG, INDIA).

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#

The leaf extract had a pale yellow color and appeared turbid soon after adding AgNO3. After the solution was kept in sunlight, the intensity of the color increased gradually from pale yellow to dark brown at the end of the experiment. The appearance of dark reddish brown color of silver nanoparticles is a clear indication of the formation of silver nanoparticles in the reaction mixture [35,36]. The color exhibited by metallic nanoparticles is due to the coherent excitation of all the “free” electrons within the conduction band, leading to a phase oscillation. There is no significant change beyond 180 min, therefore indicating the completion of the reduction reaction. The color change in the solution is presented in Figs. 3(a), 4(a), 5(a) and 6(a). This was further confirmed by UV–vis spectroscopic analysis.

Optical measurement is the prime technique for characterizing the biological synthesis of nanoparticles. Figs. 3(c), 4(c), 5(c) and 6(c)
                        
                        
                        
                         show the UV–visible spectra of the samples periodically withdrawn and subjected to UV–visible spectroscopy during the experiment. Silver nanoparticles are known to exhibit a plasmon absorption band in the visible region just like gold nanoparticles. A broad peak located at 463 nm was observed after 5 min of exposure in sunlight. The height of the peak (i.e., the absorbance) increased with time till the end of experiment. However, gradual shift in the peak from 463 to 475 nm characteristic of surface plasmon resonance of silver nanoparticles formation is observed and after that it remained constant till the end of experiment. It is distinguished that AgNPs exhibit brownish colors, depending on the concentration and the size of nanoparticles; the colors arise due to the excitation of Surface Plasmon Resonance (SPR) of the AgNPs. The appearance of the brownish color was due to the excitation of the SPR, typical of AgNPs having λ
                        max values in the visible range of 400–500 nm [37,38]. The absorption maximum increases with respect to time, mainly due to the formation of more nanoparticles. This also supports the strong reducing property of plant leaves extract.

FTIR spectroscopy measurements are carried out to identify the biomolecules that bound specifically on the silver surface and local molecular environment of capping agent on the nanoparticles. To remove any free biomass residue or compound that is not the capping ligand of the nanoparticles, the residual solution of 100 ml after reaction was centrifuged at 10,000 rpm for 10 min and the resulting suspension was redispersed in 10 ml sterile distilled water. Thereafter, the purified suspension was freeze dried to obtain dried powder. Finally, the dried nanoparticles were analyzed by FTIR spectrophotometer. Figs. 3(d), 4(d), 5(d) and 6(d) impart the broad peak in higher energy region 3524, 3574, 3541 and 3548 cm−1, which characterize the polysaccharides from T. involucrata, C. citronella, S. verbascifolium and T. ovata, respectively. These absorption frequencies are assigned to the O–H group [39–41].

The bands at 2534, 2532, 2524 and 2541 cm−1 can be assigned to the carboxylic acid O–H Stretch. The bands appearing at 1530, 1537, 1538 and 1546 cm−1 are assigned to the N–H group. The absorption bands observed at 1638, 1732, 1734 and 1738 cm−1 can be assigned to the amide groups of protein or to the CO stretching vibration group. The prominent bands at 728, 674, 685 and 625 cm−1 are assigned to aromatic class. Previous studies have confirmed the fact that the carbonyl group from amino acid residues and proteins has the stronger ability to bind metal, indicating that the proteins could possibly form a layer covering the metal nanoparticles to prevent agglomeration and thereby stabilize the medium. Also, the extracted polysaccharides contain reducing sugars that possess the ability to reduce silver and synthesis the nanoparticles through green synhtesis routes.

The crystalline nature of AgNPs was confirmed from XRD analysis. Figs. 3(e), 4(e), 5(e) and 6(e) illustrated that the XRD pattern of the as prepared AgNPs. The spectra of XRD clearly indicate that the synthesized AgNPs using the above-mentioned extracts are crystalline in nature. They correspond to the lattice planes (111), (200) and (220) which were indexed for face centered cubic (fcc) silver, which is well consistent with the standard data file JCPDS No. 42-0783. Furthermore, remaining small peaks are observed. This peak is due to crystallization of bioorganic present in plant leaves extract. This peak is much weaker than those of Ag, which indicates that the Ag is the core material in the composite. The average sizes of the AgNPs synthesized by leaf extracts of T. involucrata, C. citronella, S. verbascifolium and T. ovata are around 32, 36, 41 and 28 nm, respectively [42–45].

FESEM has provided further insight into the morphology and size details of the synthesized nanoparticles. The high resolution study of the nanoparticles using FESEM revealed that the AgNPs are polydispersed and spherical in shape. There were observed few traces of AgNPs clusters due to aggregation of nanoparticles, which might be induced by the evaporation solvent during sample preparation [46]. These could have contributed for the variation in a particle size. The size of the nanoparticles which ranged between 40 and 45 nm in size.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

The present work was focused on the development of a green method for the synthesis of AgNPs using Indian herbal plants. Silver nanoparticles prepared in this process are fast, suitable, eco-friendly, and can be potentially applied in variety of extracts for preparing different metal nanoparticles. The as prepared samples are characterized by Visual examination, UV–vis spectroscopy, FESEM, XRD and FTIR measurements. The characterization of Ag+ ions exposed to these plant extracts by color change and UV–vis techniques confirms the reduction of silver ions to silver nanoparticles. A possible mechanism responsible for the formation of AgNPs has been elucidated through FTIR analysis. The biomolecules responsible for the reduction and stabilization of silver nanoparticles are identified using FTIR spectroscopy. AgNPs of high purity and crystallinity are obtained as depicted by the XRD. The results confirmed the reduction of silver nitrate to silver nanoparticles with high stability and without any impurity. In the present study, we found that the leaves of plants were good source for the synthesis of AgNPs and have many medicinal advantages.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

