These rules can be stated independently of the formulation of purely semantic rules that determine lexical and syntactic choices.
Once the sentence planner has constructed the DSyntR of a complete sentence, it sends it to the realizer which generates the English sentence.
We have developed a &quot;schema language&quot; for easy representation of DCK, called DICKENS (DomaIn Communication Knowledge ENcoding Schemas).
Other special commands support conditional branching and iteration.
It receives propositions from the text planner and sends the DSyntR of complete sentences to the realizer for processing.
It has two main tasks: first, it chooses lexical and syntactic realizations by consulting the Conceptual/English dictionary; second, it determines sentence scope by merging the DSyntR of individual propositions.
Each proposition is mapped into the DSyntR of a clause (i.e., its root is a verb).
Lexicalization can take pragmatic factors into account.
It can also refer to a history of lexicalizations if lexical variation is desired.
After a DSyntR has been constructed, certain syntactic paraphrase operations are performed if necessary, for example passivization if a grammatical object is the theme of the sentence, or if the subject is absent.
Joyce performs the following syntactic clausecombining operations: Relative clause formation, adjectival attachment (the process by which an adjective from a copula-construction is embedded in an NP), and conjunction.
The stylistic constraints are constraints against the sentence becoming too long (an upper bound on the number of clauses that can be combined into one sentence), and a constraint on recursive embedding of relative clauses.
The sentence planner maintains a &quot;current&quot; DSyntR.
Each incoming proposition is translated into a DSyntR, which the sentence planner then attempts to merge with the current DSyntR.
If none of the clause combination strategies work, or if stylistic heuristics interfere, or if the incoming proposition is a conceptual-break, the current DSyntR is sent to the realizer and the new DSyntR becomes the current one.
The process of clause combination can be very easily modeled at the DSyntR level: relative clause formation and conjunction reduce to simple tree composition operations.
Not all arguments must be filled by a :make-proposition command; the sentence planner will choose lexical and syntactic realizations accordingly.
The text planner sends an insecure-flow proposition to the sentence planner, which translates it into a DSyntR tree (which represents the clause In the Black Box an insecure flow occurs) and returns control to the text planner.
When the sentence planner re
ceives the enter proposition, it translates it into the DSyntR tree shown in Figure 9, which could be expressed as the clause information enters the Black Box through P6.
The sentence planner then tries to combine the new DSyntR with the current one (which was derived from the previous proposition).
This fails (since the two clauses have different verbs and different actants), so the current DSyntR is sent to the realizer, which prints out the first sentence.
The new DSyntR becomes the current one.
The sentence planner generates the clausal DSyntR tree shown in Figure 10 (the information is classified).
It then attempts to combine the new clause with the &quot;current DSyntR&quot;, first using the adjectival attachment strategy.
It then returns control to the text planner, since another clause could be merged with the current DSyntR.
The only effect of this schema is to send a conceptual-break message to the sentence planner, which thereupon sends its current DSyntR to the realizer.
Note that this combination is not a linguistic one but a conceptual one, since it relies on facts about sending data in this domain, rather than on the syntax or lexical semantics about the verb send.
(Realization components, on the other hand, can be tested for their syntactic and perhaps lexical coverage.)
Several new lexical items were entered into the English lexicon.
Note that those parts of Joyce that deal with facts of English (including clause combination) needed no attention (other than updating the lexicon).
