Several researchers have suggested using them for improving lexical acquisition.
Alternations provide a means of reducing redundancy in the lexicon since the alternating scFs need not be enumerated for each individual verb if a marker is used to specify which verbs the alternation applies to.
The resulting SCF lexicon lists each verb with the scFs it takes.
A conditional probability is attached to each of the classes in the set.
The cost of describing each argument head (n) is calculated using the log of the probability estimate for the classes on the TCM that n belongs to (ca).
The probability estimates are shown for the classes along the TCM.
To compare the preferences we compare the probability distributions across WordNet using a measure of distributional similarity.
Since the probability distributions may be at different levels of WordNet, we map the Tcms at the target slots to a common tree cut, a &quot;base cut&quot;.
The probability estimate for a hypernym class is obtained by combining the probability estimates for all its hyponyms on the original cut.
The UBC is at the classes B, C and D. To quantify the similarity between the probability distributions for the target slots we use the a-skew divergence (asp) proposed by Lee (1999).
1 This measure, defined in equation 2, is a smoothed version of the Kulback-Liebler divergence. p1(x) and p2(x) are the two probability distributions which are being compared.
We experiment with a SCF lexicon produced from 19.3 million words of parsed text from the BNC (Leech, 1992).
We used the causative and conative alternations, since these have enough candidates in our lexicon for experimentation.
From these, verbs were selected which had 75% or more agreement, i.e. three or more judges giving the same yes or no decision for the verb.
For the causative alternation we were left with 46 positives and 53 negatives.
Both thresholds outperform the random baseline of 50%.
There verbs have a high probability mass (around 0.7) under the entity class in both target slots, since both people and types of food occur under this class.
In cases like these, the probability distributions at the RBC, and frequently the UBC, are not sufficiently distinctive.
A sample of 12 verbs (6 positive and 6 negative) remained after the selection process outlined above.
For this small sample we obtained a significant result (p = 0.02) with a mean accuracy of 67% and a median accuracy of 83%.
This is significant to the 95% level, a lower level than that for the classbased experiments.
The mean produces an accuracy of 58% whilst the median produces an accuracy of 50%.
